
Chapter 13 Tench proof: soul docs nor grow with the growth of chis body. 
Seventh Book: On soul being indivisible with respect co its sensitive part. 
Chapter I Soul is neither body, nor form divided in body, nor some point of such a form, but a form present in ics entirety in any pare of body. We can sec chis via its capacity for sense-perception. First proof: body docs not receive images appropriate co sensation. 
Chapter 2 Second proof: che live senses muse converge on one center. 
Chapter 3 TI1ird proof: che more concentrated the sense, che sharper ic is. 
Chapter 4 Fourth proof: if che sense is divided, chen the sensible image in it is divided. 
Chapter 5 Fifth proof: wherever the soul perceives it docs so as a whole. 
Chapter 6 Sixth proof: in perceiving, soul is not necessarily passive. 
Chapter 7 Seventh proof: specific proofs (based on the natural and sensory power of the soul) that the soul is nor a divisible form because the work ofquality is undivided. 
Chapter 8 Eighth proof: the complexion acts through the power of qualities. 
Chapter 9 Ninth proof: the complexion is an accidental form. 


Chapter 10 Tenth proof: chc harmony of the complexion docs not act on the body. 
Chapter II Eleventh proof: there is a harmony in every compound body. 
Chapter 12 T wclfth proof: harmony is understood either as the composition itself of the body's pares or as some rational principle of chc composition. 
Chapter 13 Thirteenth proof: the harmony of the humors sustains nothing without matter. 
Chapter 14 Fourteenth proof: the more concordant something is, chc more it is a harmony. 
Chapter 15 Fifteenth proof: harmony docs not admit anything dissonant. 
Eighth Book: On soul with respect to the intellective pare. Since it is indivisible ic is immortal. 
Chapter I First proof: Soul is undivided form everywhere complete and in no way docs it take its origin from matter. It is therefore immortal as its power of understanding demonstrates. Rational soul ascends to spirit through four degrees. 
Chapter 2 Second proof: soul is nourished by truth. 
Chapter 3 Third proof: the power or virtue ofsoul. being indivisible, cannot be a quality of body. 
Chapter 4 Fourth proof: the species or inrclligiblc concept cannot be received by body. 


Chapter 5 Fifrh proof: if mind is body, then it understands by making contact and moving around. 
Chapter 6 Sixth proof: intellect receives whatever it receives with its whole self; it would not do this if it were corporeal. 
Chapter 7 Seventh proof: intellect docs not lose its own form when it receives the forms of objects; the opposite is true of bodies. 
Chapter 8 Eighth proof: form in mind is universal; such cannot exist in body. 
Chapter 9 Ninth proof: minds mutually embrace each other but bodies do not. 
Chapter 10 Tenth proof: mind operates through all bodies and above bodies. 
Chapter II Eleventh proof: mind benefits from rest, body from motion. 
Chapter 12 T wclfrh proof: opposites in matter arc not opposites in mind. 
Chapter 13 Thirteenth proof: in accepting forms, mind is not changed. 
Chapter 14 Fourteenth proof: the activity of body aims at something compound, the activity of mind at things simple. 
Chapter 15 Fifteenth proof: an action of mind has the action as its end, an action of body ends in a product. 
Chapter 16 Sixteenth proof: bodily form docs not possess infinite force, bur mind docs. 

BOOK V 
I 
Every rational soul is immortal. First proof: that rational soul moves of itself and in a circle. 
We put all these souls at the level of the third essence• and hold chem to be immortal on the general principle chat they arc the first to be moved; and because they arc the first to be moved, they arc moved in a circle. 
Because they are the first co be moved, they arc moved for ever. 2 For where the first movement is, there is perpetual movement. For ifthe source of movement were to dry up, nothing else in nature would be moved. Again, what is moved first provides internal and external movement to itself. Internal movement is life; so it sup• plies life to itself. Because it never abandons itself {for perpetual love ofitself is innate in every nature), it never stops living. For if what is moved by another clings to the mover as long as it is being moved, then afortiori what is moved by itself, in that it is the same as the mover and is never abandoned by the mover, never stops be­ing moved. 
Furthermore, if we suppose it to die at some point in time, then 3 either it will stop existing before it stops being moved, or vice versa, or both at the same time. The first is not possible, because movement cannot continue separated from essence; nor is the sec­ond, because spontaneous movement is the constant companion of anything that initiates its own movement. Nor is the third possi­ble, because destructive change cannot ever erupt from within char which is the source ofviral and life-giving movement; and it can• not happen from without, for a source of movement is not moved from elsewhere. This then is the particular property of the third 


• BOOK V • CHAPTER II · 
essence. Since all rational souls arc in that third essence from a general definition, the same property is also proper to them all. 
They are also immortal because through the nature of the third 4 essence and of prime movement they arc moved in a circle. For if they arc moved in a circle they never stop moving. For circular movement docs not spend its force, buc gathers whatever belongs to it into itself again, and just when it is thought to fail, it renews itself. At this point I will pass over Pythagoras' proof dcmonstrat• ing that in a sphere chcre is no beginning or end, and thus that movement within a sphere never begins or ends, but that rational souls arc what might be called spiritual spheres and complete a spiritual orbit within themselves in that the bodies which arc their shadows have just such a figure and motion. i Hence che visible spheres and orbits arc shadows of the invisible spheres and orbits; and if these shadows arc perpetual, afortiori will the substances be perpetual which by means of a limirlcss power enact a limitless motion; and nothing contrary to chem exists by which they may be destroyed, just as no movement exists contrary co their move• mcnc which is circular. 
: II : 
Second proof: that soul through its s11bstance is unmoving. 
Just as che previous proof demonstrated the immortality of chc 1 soul through its motion, the same is also demonstrated through 
its rest. 
When we speak of soul we mean the genus of rational souls. 2 For we do not properly call irrational lives souls but rather the idols and simulacra of souls. If the rhird essence, which we have fully discussed, although it is moved in its activity nevertheless rests in its substance, then it follows that soul which is the same as that essence may not be changed in substance. But whar is such never ceases to exist. 


: III 
Third proof: that soul cleaves to things divine. 
Bue if the two essences located on the lowest level of nature, 1 namely matter and quantity, arc passive, and the other two located on the highest level, God and angel, arc active, then whar is the condition of soul and quality which occupy the middle level be­tween the passive and the active~ Each certainly emerges as a par­ticipant in passivity. Bur quality, because it inheres totally in its re• cipienrs, is subject to passivity in both activity and essence. Soul, however, which is further removed, although in its operative fac­ulty it senses some bodily passion, yet in essence it is free from passion. Just as body, being passive since made from matter and quantity, renders the quality inherent in it subject ro corruption, so God and angel, being active, rake soul, which is the nearest es­sence to them and divorced from body, and with their divinity make ir immortal. 
: IV : 
Fourth proof: that so11l rules matter. 
The immortality of soul is principally shown by the fact that na• 1 ture's prime matter, which is moved and formed by soul, muse ir• self be perpetual. 

Art imitates nature. Art produces its artifacts in the following 
2 
order: it imprints some or other forms in the material at hand, none of which the material has as its own. For clay docs not pos­sess the shape at all of any particular vase, bur assumes different shapes one after another from the potter; and when the vases break, the clay remains, and other vases can be made out of it again. Therefore nature herself, the craftsman of the world, has subject co it a matter that is lacking all forms, but is equally ready to receive all forms. Just as God at the highest level of things is pure act, is in need of nothing, is the creator ofall forms, so there muse be something at the lowest level which is pure potentiality, which needs everything, and which in itself is without form yet capable of caking on all forms. Thus the universal matter, the indifferent receptacle ofall forms whatsoever, is subject co the uni­versal craftsman and to nature. What we call prime matter is sub­ject equally co the forms of clements and of ocher bodies, taking on one form after another by a natural power, but not possessing any form of its own in its own nature. For it would not be at the lowest level if it possessed any perfection, or if any capacity for ac­tion were natural co it from its own form: nor would it be fir to re­ceive another form contrary co its own form. Ifcold were a natural characteristic of matter, how would it receive heat; if wetness, how would it receive dryness~ 
Ifyou want to find chis hidden matter, rake note of the rccipro-3 cal interchange of the clements. When we sec that where the form of earth had been earlier afterwards the form of water appears, we cannot say that the newly-arrived form of water has been received in the form of earth. For in a way they arc in opposition to each other, since earth contains dryness, and water, wetness. The form ofearth therefore docs not receive the form ofwater, bur when the watery form approaches, vanishes into the chaos. But the form of water cannot exist without a substrate; and yet in the generation of water no new substrate presents itself. So the same matter which was the substrate for the form of earth now receives the form of matter. This is the argument used by Timaeus the Py­rhagorean.1 

When the sun, by beating down on the sea with its rays, makes 4 the water evaporate in mists and from the water gives birth to air, it has certainly extracted at least a small portion ofwater from the element of water. Our question is whether it first reduced that small portion of water to nothing and then produced air, or whether it preserved some of the water. If it reduced the water en• cirely to nothing, chen nature's intention would be directed to· wards evil. Yet char intention always aims at the good, since ic is governed by God's highest goodness. And existence itself, which is the peculiar gift of eternal God, would be stolen from things at some point by causes subsequent co God. This is impossible, since God preserves by His influence what He has once given; and no agent pits its force against that. Since things inferior co God do not possess absolute existence, but only qualified existence-such or such existence -, they do not have the power to abolish exis­tence completely, but only a particular mode of existence. le would also follow that the sun would be generating that new air out of nothing if it had completely annihilated the portion of the earlier water. Natural agents cannot make something out of nothing. For to make something our of something existing is easier than to make it out of nothing. However, they cannot produce just any­thing from a given seed: pears never come from wheat, or figs from millet, or an eagle from a man's seed. Much less can they produce something out of nothing. 
The argument shows char the sun cannot have reduced that 5 portion of water ic took from che sea to nothing. So some pare of its former nature endures. Whac can it be? The water was cer· tainly cold and wet. The cold has disappeared, bur the wetness re· mains, say the Platoniscs, being common to both air and water. If the wetness remains, then the matter that is che subscrace for wec­ncss also remains. For wetness is not a form separated from bod­ies. So the matter that was previously hidden under the cold ofthe water now lurks under the hear of the air. But since from air comes fire, this matter also loses its wetness and receives dryness. 
Such matter, which rises to the form of fire simply by being re-6 fined through rarefaction, in turn sinks through condensation: it thickens into air, condenses into water, and lasdy solidifies into earth. You witness one matter assuming all forms in turn as it rises through rarefaction and sinks through condensation. It is one, therefore, firscly because one matter suffices for one universe; sec­ondly because, being without form, it docs not have anything by means of which it can be divided internally into many. But if the universe ends in a single entity that receives form, it is appropriate chat it also begin from a single agent char gives form and chat it is totally subject to that agent. But we have talked about chis else­where and will do so again. 
However, this matter is never corrupted because it is the faun• 7 dation of all of corporeal nature, and were it destroyed, the whole world structure would collapse. It can never be dissolved into parrs because it is not naturally composed of parts. For parrs arc the re­sult of quantity. But matter is prior to quantity: for it is the sub­strate of quantity and of quality. Bue the substrate must always precede the thing which resides in it. Nor can it be destroyed by the accession of some contrary quality. For no quality is contrary to it, since it naturally receives all qualities equally; and no form that requires a basis in matter opposes it. For truly it would be op• posing itself if it destroyed its own basis. Nor docs matter require anything else as its scat by whose removal perchance it would plunge into the abyss. For it is itself the prime foundation of all. 
And ifsome force destroyed it, chat force would either reduce it 8 to nothing or change it into something else. The first is impossi­ble. For whatever docs something is led to act by the natural desire to propagate its own perfection, so that it generates something else 
• BOOK V • CHAPTER IV · 
as like itself as possible: this is clear in the case of clements, plants, and animals. Herc it is obvious that natural desire is directed to• wards rhc good, that is, towards life, existence and so on, not to their opposites, because, as we said, desire has been implanted by the highest good in all that comes after it. For the source of all things' existence is the source of their movement and thither arc they borne. So all the desire and activity of everything, since it springs from the good, is directed to and turns back towards the good. Moreover, whoever docs away with matter completely can­not anchor his new work anywhere, the foundation of all forms that can be generated having disappeared. Thus matter would be destroyed and nothing new produced. For if something is due to be made afresh and it requires matter, with the matter removed it would be impossible now for it to be made. If it docs not require matter, it is independent of matter. What is independent of mat­ter and superior to it is brought into existence by its Creator scpa• ratcly from matter. So its Author, when He brings it into exis­tence, because He fashions it in the absence of matter, docs not accordingly exert any force on matter; nor docs He move matter in any way in the generation of the work, as He has no need of mat­ter to realize it. Thar which produces something new. whatever it may be, whether it requires matter or is alien to it, docs not, there• fore, annihilate matter. 
But perchance will rhc matter be changed into something else, 9 so that one part of the matter survives and one part perishes? Not at all. For matter is simple, because neither is it composed from matter and form, since it is the prime and formless potentiality, nor docs it require a specified mass of parts for its existence, since in its natural origin it precedes the dimensions of quantity. More­over, if it were to change, such that once the change were com­pleted something else was left over, what would that something be? Would it be matter? If so, then it docs not appear to have changed into something else, since it is still there. Were it quantity 


• BOOK V • CHAPTER V · 
or quality, that would be absurd, since they cannot endure without matter. Ifit were some form superior to matter, why did one need co destroy the matter in order to make chis cornplcccly unrelated form, which in no sense comes into existence from matter and is produced at a total remove from it? Or rather, since matter is completely one thing, and form separate from it another, nothing of matter remains simply because the changed and separate form endures. 
We may conclude as follows. Matter cannot be changed from 10 what it is except by being changed into nothing. Nature does not permit :myching co be turned into nothing. So matter docs not pass away. Much less will that natural power which rules over mat• ter pass away. Matter's ruler is che efficient power which gives it form. That power gives matter form which first sets it in motion. The source of motion is the rational soul, and qualities serve it as the instruments for moving matter. And every rational soul, by way ofthe nature of the third essence,~ rules over universal matter. Bur more ofchis anon. 
God creates and gives unity co matter. Angel, say the Placon-11 ists, strengthens it and puts it in order. Immortal soul secs it in motion and gives it form. God is unity and He gives unity to im• mortal matter. Angel is immortal order, and angel produces order in immortal matter. Soul is immortal life and soul gives life co im­mortal matter by setting it in motion. 
V: 
Fifth proof: that soul is independent of matter. 
The natural philosophers list four causes of natural things: effi-1 cicnr, final, material, and formal.5 The efficient cause of a man is universal nature and a man; the final cause is human happiness; the material cause is body; the formal cause is soul. Whenever something is said to exist through itself, it means it exists without a cause. Whenever it is said to exist through another, it exists through a cause. God alone exists through Himself such that He exists wichouc any cause. He exists entirely through Himself. therefore, in that He excludes from Himself the four genera of causes. Natural body exists entirely through something else, be• cause ic includes the four causes simultaneously. Below God noth­ing can exist which is without efficient cause and end, for the one God is che creator and end ofall things. So nothing will be found ocher than God which can properly be said to exist through itself such that it has neither efficient cause nor end. 


It is not fitting, however, char everything below God should be 2 through another such that all arc cocally through another. For be­ing cocally through oneself and being totally through another arc two mutually distant extremes. There has to be some mean be­tween them which resembles them both. Since every agent acts in accordance with its own nature, any product made dirccrly from itself, in that it is produced immediately from the agent's nature, necessarily resembles it as much as possible. So what is created di­rectly by God and in accordance with His principal design, if I may use the term, should not cum our to be very different from God. There must therefore exist between God and body some• thing which cannot be said to exist entirely through another. 
Quality might seem to be such a thing, being the result nor of 3 four causes like body, but depending only on three. Body has mat• ccr and form as its causes, plus an efficient cause and an end. Quality has no form, being itself the formal cause. For ic is itself a form. But no form, qua form, is formed. Yee quality is made by something else and is directed by an agent towards an end. le is even dependent on matter as a cause, since from matter's teeming womb it is delivered in to the light ofday like a foetus, and is ex• tended along with matter and divided. Quality then is one level above body in chat it is said to be in some manner through itself, since it is not formed by another. 


But doesn't the third essence, which is higher than quality, also 4 excel quality by at least one degree, just as quality excels body by one degred Indeed it docs. Bur how~ It is not because chis essence lacks an efficient cause or end, since this is proper co God alone. And it is not because chis essence does not have form as its cause, for the same goes for quality. The only remaining possibility is chat it excels matter because it does not depend on matter ( which is not true at all ofquality). So we must proceed seep by step from the four conrrarics ro their four opposites by three and by two, so chat, just as we rise from four causes for body to three causes for quality, so we may rise from three causes for quality to two causes for the third essence. Wherefore chis essence will have an efficient and a final cause only, but not have form or matter [ as causes] . Finally, angel excels chis essence by one degree, since angel neither depends on matter (like quality], nor inclines towards matter (like soul], since it is directly possessed by God. 
The third essence, though it is independent of matter and yet 5 has been created far from God and close co matter, in a way in­clines towards matter and on account of this inclination is called m1i111a6 (breath]. Though it may incline, yet it does noc depend on matter. This can be shown by a number of proofs. The first is the argument we have just presented. TI1e second is chat if this es­sence were buried in matter, it would never rise to things divine, which are at the furthest remove from matter, and so ic could not serve as che world's firring knot, because it would not tie che low­est things to che highest. The third argument is char, since it is the first co be moved, chis essence necessarily moves through itself freely and in a circle. If it moves through itself, it acts surely through itself. If this is so, it also (exists] through itself, noc bound at all co bodies. Ifit is moved freely, it cannot be cied co 

• BOOK V • CHAPTER V · 
matter. If ir revolves in a circle, it comes back ro itself, and matter is left aside. The fourth argument is that, if the essence rules mat• ter by moving it nrst and giving it form, ic is not mixed with mar· rer. Ir is obvious from rhis chat the essence which is rhe abode of soul ( Plato even calls it che souls' mixing bowl in the Ti11111cus)7 in no way originates from bodies and is nor even made up of chc parts of quanriry; for such pares arc present in bodies alone and qualities, but not in forms separate from cite body. l11crefore soul will not be destroyed by being broken down inro various pares. 
Soul obviously has no divcrsiry of pares as it is not divided up 6 in body. Nor can it ever fail because it is abandoned by something supporting ic, for this essence has no need ofa body's foundation, being through its own nature che mistress of bodies. Nor will ir perish because cite contrary and mutually conAiccing powers of the clements roil it at any time; for these arc in conflict in matter. Bur soul is so far above marccr char chc tempest of rhc clements and the hosciliry ofstruggling qualities do not touch it. Never will it be contaminated by receiving ac some point an alien qualiry inimical to its nature which mighr induce in it a harmful passion. For chc nrst subject exposed ro passion is matter, and through matter both quanciry (which is embedded in matter) and qualiry ( which cleaves co quanciry) arc exposed co passion. \1/hercforc chis essence which is separate from matter, chat is, this separable power, has no power in irsclf ro sustain anything strange or hostile by way of which it might become subject to passion. 


: VI : 
Sixth proof: that soul is indivisible. 
Moreover, since soul is indivisible, it cannot receive qualities which 1 arc divisible or corporeal. For what is divisible has no contact with what is indivisible. For if we said the indivisible is in contact with the divisible, we would want co know whether the divisible thing touched the indivisible with a particular point of itself or with a divisible pare ofitself. If the first case, then the point alone is what touches the indivisible object, and thus it is not the divisible thing, but something indivisible chat touches the indivisible object. But if you say it is through a divisible part of itself chat it makes contact, we will counter as follows. If chis divisible thing makes contact with what you call the indivisible object by way of some divisible part of itself, then the indivisible object must be contacted by way of a similarly divisible part of itself. For how docs the divisible 
make contact with the indivisible unless the indivisible is made contact with; and how docs the divisible make contact with the in• divisible by way of its many parts unless the indivisible is con• cactcd by way of its pares, since co the extent the divisible makes contact, the indivisible is made contact wirh~ Therefore chc thing you declared indivisible has to be divisible as soon as you concede that some divisible thing makes contact with it. Hence the indivis­ible essence of soul is never couched by any divisible qualiry. By chis I mean char it cannot be couched by either a straight line or a line bent back: nor by a straight line, because the soul itself will not accept a qualiry chat is rushing to meet it from the opposite direction; and not by a line bent back, because, since the soul is free from body, it is not swept up by the rumulc and frenzy of qualities raging in the body, and so is not corrupted by any one of 
chem. 


Is it possible then for it to be corrupted by something indivisi­
2 
blc, which it might readily accept? Obviously not. For the rcccp· cion of indivisible qualities perfects what receives them and docs not corrupt it. This is evident from chose indivisible images of things which arc received by water, by mirrors, and by soul, boch chrough chc senses and through the reason. Strictly speaking, one thing aces on another for no ocher reason except chat the one sup• plies its form to the ocher; for all chings arc led to action in order co propagate their own nature. Bue no corporeal entity is able or strives co engender its corporeal form in the essence of soul, which is so divorced from matter chat corporeal forms have no access co it at all. Arc we co suppose then chat God or angel introduces into soul a new form which perturbs the soul? Certainly not. For if they arc creating some self-subsisting form, they arc creating it separate from soul. So soul is not disturbed by its creation. Bue if they arc instilling some power into soul, this power is beneficial, since it comes from the best causes which arc the preservers of chat soul. So soul of itself docs not die but is preserved. 
: VII : 
Seventh proof: that soul has its existence in its essence. 
We call essence one thing, existence anochcr.9 We call essence the 1 rational principle of a thing which is comprised in its definition. But existence is the act of its essence, and its particular presence in the nature of things. Take the example of a comet. The essence of a comet is contained in its rational principle or definition: let us say it is a dry vapor in the upper reaches of the air, lit up by the fire, and circling through che air in due order. The definition is true today even if today there is no comet visible anywhere. But 

• BOOK V • CHAPTER vn . 
the existence ofa comer is said to be such rhat rhc comer's nature, which is designated daily by way of definition, is somewhere visi­ble ar chis moment. Such existence is impossible without a specific place and time. For that essence cannot be present otherwise rhan being here or rhere, then or now. Thus the existence of natural ob­jects requires a particular place and rime; rhcir essence docs not. That rational principle of a comer is rrue even if no comer is blaz­ing anywhere ac che present moment. Or rather, if the definition included a specific time and place-here today, there tomorrow ­
then at the same hour and in the same region of the air where there was one comet, all chc comets would be simultaneously. For the common essence and rational principle ofa comet is present in individual comers. If chis principle were limited to a particular place and time, however, all comets would be subject to the same limitations of place and time, just as rational capacity, since it is contained in rhc definition of man, is common to individual men. 
Thus the essence and existence of natural objects differ from 2 each other in that existence is limited co a particular time and place, but essence, considered in itself, is equally disposed to just about every time and place, seeing char humanity in itself can exist no less in ocher centuries than in our own, and no less in che cast than in che west. Bue Plaro and Socrates, in order to exist and be alive, need chis or char rime and place. In humanity itself is desig• nated essence, in these individual men existence. Essence then is excluded from the particular limitations of rime or place. Where• fore by way of its own nature it needs no place co preserve itself, nor docs it have temporal limits by which it could one day be ex• cccded, for it is free from such constraints. So it continues to flourish everywhere and forever. Thus all essence is said to be in it• self immortal. Bur such by its nature is the essence ofevery form. 
When, however, the Creator of all forms engenders essences 3 and brings chem forth into existence, He determines an existence for some of chem such chat they exisr in a body. As a result, the existence of such an essence or form is restricted by the agent to corporeal conditions. When existence is confined to the body, es­sence too is constrained within the same limits. 111c conditions of 


natural bodies arc such chat they fill space and arc moved in time. 111ercforc chat form which on its own would be superior to any definite rime or place is now subject to its own time and place. As it is subject to time, it comes gradually into existence, undergoes change, and comes to an end. As it is subject to place, as long as the body in which it dwells endures conflicting qualities from day to day, it too is perturbed by the tempest ofsuch barding qualities and becomes mortal. Such arc the forms and qualities of bodies. 
But the Creator has brought the essences of other forms into 4 existence such that rhcir allotted existence is not in some other thing or in matter, bur they contain it in themselves. Such arc all forms which have no dealings with matter. For they have their ex­istence in themselves, not in matter. Bur whatever is received by another is received normally in proportion to the capaciry of its re­ceiver, and it is drawn cowards the proper characteristics of chat receiver. But any essence of itself is immortal. So the existence which is received by the essence, since it is received by something immortal in an immortal way, is rendered immortal. Therefore form char is separated from the company of matter is immortal in all respects, rhac is, in its existence as in its essence. Such is the third essence, the source of rational souls. 

VIII 
Eighth proof: that soul 1,as its own existence and never departs from its form. 
Generation and corruption arc so opposed to each ocher chat they 1 proceed in contradictory directions: generation is a way towards existence, corruption the way towards non-existence. Every single thing proceeds towards existence in chat it acquires a particular form, buc towards non-existence in chat ic is forced co lose its form. In chc arcs no work is such and such on account of the ma• terial, but on account of the form. A bronze horse or man is not so called on account of chc matter being bronze, for the bronze is equally capable of taking on the shapes of all animals, buc on ac• count of chc particular form or likeness of a horse or man which comes from the arrisc. This piece of bronze is called a horse, chat piece a man. In nature similarly it is not the matter chat makes Plato a man or a fig tree a tree. For che same prime matter of the world is common to men, animals, and trees; and chat same mat• tcr exists many centuries before Plato and many centuries after Plato, while Plato docs not. So it is not because of matter char Plato belongs co the human species, but because of the particular complexion of his body9 and because of his soul. and boch arc called forms. Other examples must lead to a similar judgment and we should conclude briefly chat from form everything has ics own distinctive existence, nature, and specics.10 Therefore what· ever ceases co exist loses its existence because it is separated from its own form, just as earlier ic had begun its existence when it had acquired its own form. That is why something composed of mat• tcr and form, fire, for example, which is composed ofits own mass and a natural heat, ceases co exist when it is separated from its form. Bue chc cold of water or earth can insinuate itself inco chc 


matter offire and drive our rhe natural heat, the form of fire. Once this is driven our, fire ceases to exist. 
So the fire, compounded of matter and chis natural hear, loses 2 its existence when it loses irs hear, I mean by chis its substantial form along with its properties (which form, as it docs nor have an obvious name and for the argument's sake, I am now calling hear}. But when docs chis hear lose irs existence, since it is a form, and existence comes from a form~ Obviously, when it is expelled from its matter. For in compound objects existence is naturally be­stowed on rite whole, not on che parrs. Assuredly, the fire's exis• tcncc is properly char of the compound, not that of matter or the hear alone. For when, in the generation of fire, hear was extracted by a natural agent from a seed of matter, it was extended through­out the matter of the fire. However its condition was such char it entirely depended on matter and did not have its own existence, bur was said to exist through the common existence of che whole fire. That common existence ceases when the two pares arc sepa• rared from each ocher. And when the common existence ceases, the form that Aourishcd via the common existence also perishes. But the matter docs not perish, since it immediately receives an• ocher form through which it may exist, so that, when it loses the requisite hear, it loses its existence as fire: bur when it receives the requisite cold or wetness, it acquires existence as earth or water. You should conclude that a compound like fire or w:irer ce:ises to exist when ic is separated from its form, but that rhe form is de­stroyed when it departs from rhe law of rhc form-giver. The sun which gave birth to fire exists as the form-giver of fire. Ir extracted he:it from the kindling of matter with rhe proviso char the hear re• siding in chat matter would be conr:iincd in it subject to the exis• rence of the compound as a whole. Heat breaks this law when ir leaves the matter. It le:ives when it is driven out by cold. 
How then can something char leaves neither its form nor the 3 law of the form-giver cease to exist, when the existence of every 


• BOOK V • CHAPTER vm . 
object comes from its form and is sustained by the law of the 
form-giver? But soul, on account of the third essence's characteris­
tic property, is a pure form: it is neither compounded from matter 
and form, nor docs it recline in m:mcr. Therefore, resting in itself, 
whatever is in it is nothing other than form. Thus its own essence 
is not formed via anything else, but it is rhe form of itself, that is 
co say, it is itself form. Bur there is nothing which can be separated 
via itself from its own essence, because nothing takes leave of it• 
self. All things by a natural instinct and constant effort preserve 
themselves to the best of their ability and ding to themselves. 
Therefore soul, if it is never separated from itself and is itself its 
own form, is never separated from its form. And so it never ceases 
to exist, since existence is always plucked out ofform. It is not sep• 
arated from itself of its own accord, 11 as we said, but neither too 
can it be compelled by external force to take leave of itself, because 
whatever it receives from outside, it receives in its particular way. 
Soul is plainly spiritual and not bound to place and time. So it re• 
ceives everything in a spiritual and unbound way. Bue things spiri• 
rual and unbound in being received by something do not perish. 
For a spiritual reception, when it occurs in bodies, docs not cor• 
rupt the bodies, although they arc unlike itself, as is the case too with the reception of simulacra in water or a mirror. Much less will it corrupt a spiritual thing very like itself. 
Moreover, since chis unbound something that was supposed to 4 have been received by the soul's essence is eternal, why should it destroy its host? To feed off its host's matter? No! For what is eternal needs no nourishment. To propagate itself and bring forth a progeny like itself from the host's matter? No! For what always remains the same has no need of propagation, nor can it generate something eternal from something corruptible. So it docs not cor• rupc something in order to generate something else cccmal like it­self. So in no way is the soul's essence able to receive anything by which it is destroyed. It cannot rightly receive anything entirely harmful. since it lacks matter which is called the prime and appro• priate receptacle of such harmful passions. 

Or rather, if that essence is the form of itself, then nothing can s ever intervene between it and its form. For ifsome mean were ever to intervene between itself and its form, rhe mean would have to be closer to its form than its own essence was. Bur the essence is the form itself. So something would be closer to itself rhan it is ro itself. TI1is is utterly absurd. Wherefore nothing is inserted as a mean between the essence and its form. If this is so, the essence is nor separated from its form by anything intervening. Bur neither coo is it separated of its own accord. 
Ir follows then that in no way docs it depart from itself and its 6 form, nor too from rhe law of the form-giver, since it was created by char law to remain in itself. And it always remains thus. For it is not dislodged by anything from char condition: not by itself, for everything preserves for itself its own species and dignity to rhe best of its ability; not by higher causes, for with the same law rhey produced it they also maintain it; and nor by lower causes, for the higher is never mastered by the lower. So soul. since it is pure form and therefore never departs either from its form or from the law of rhe form-giver, is indoubredly everlasting and immortal. 
: IX 
Ninth proof: that existence belongs to soul in itself. 
What belongs co something in itself is never separated from it. 1 Roundness is present in a circle by its very nature and so no circle ever exists without roundness. Roundness is present on occasion in timber, not because it is timber (for all timber would be round), bur because it receives from a craftsman the circular shape which 
49 

comes with roundness; and so it is forced to accept roundness. The timber stops ar some point being round as soon as it stops being circular; at that point the timber remains but not as round. But a circular shape is necessarily round so char were it to cease being round, it would also cease being circular. Similarly heat be­longs to fire in itself, wetness to water, and light to the sun. Like­wise existence belongs to form intrinsically. For whatever is a member of some species is certainly allorred ro be what it is by a form ofits own conducive to that species. Because through its own form, therefore, existence is proper to each thing, it follows that existence belongs through the genus itself ro form universally and absolutely. Whence form should itself be called the source ofexis­tence and self-cxisting.11 
Bur if it is said co exist through another by another, we will 2 then inquire whether that by which the form is said to exist has the nature of form or of matter. Jr is not of macrcr, because we sec in particular compound objects that the existence peculiar to each object docs not result from matter. In chis form through which compound things exist, therefore, chat through which it exists docs not have the power ofmatter, so it has the power of form. So the question returns to the same issue. Docs that ocher form through which the form exists exist in itself or through something else? If it exists in itself, then dearly form must be called the source of existence. If it exists through something else, then we will ask the same question as before, and so on to infinity. There­fore existence belongs to form in itself. Bur certainly the Creator of forms brought forms into existence for the particular end and integrity of the work of the world, but with this distinction: that He might determine particular forms naturally for a particular ex• istcncc: some to existence in body, others to existence in them­selves free from m:mcr. 
Form that is imprinted in matter docs not exist in the strict 3 sense, nor have its own existence. But it is said co be that by which the compound itself exists: it exists by way of the common exis­tence of the whole. Ifexistence is in itself proper to form, certainly this form which is in the body, since it too is form, of itself has the ability to accord with existence. But, given that it depends on mat• tcr and is subject to the existence of rhe compound as a whole, in what way! Take note. Existence of itself accords with form, that is, of itself follows form, "of itself follows" meaning according to its own nature. For what else docs "of itself" mean than "through its own nature"! Its nature is such as its Maker assigned it. But the Maker decreed it should inhere in matter. So its nature exists to inhere in its own matter: through this nature existence follows the form. l11ereforc existence of itself follows the form, the form, I repeat, inhering in matter. Thus this form is somehow capable of being imprinted in marrer prior to existing. Therefore it exists just as long as it inheres in matter. It docs not inhere forever, because matter, ready for all forms, often yields to contrary forms char ex­pel the earlier forms from it. Therefore this form docs not exist forever. 

Bur that other form which has been so determined by the 4 Maker for existence that it exists entirely in itself separate from body, and also because it is form, is such that its existence of itself accords with itself-of itself meaning of its own nature. The na• turc assigned to it is to inhere in itself. Therefore its existence fol­lows insofar as it inheres in itself. that is, its existence follows its form without its sprouting from a substrate. \1/henevcr you say "of itself existence follows the form," you arc saying "existence follows the form inhering in itself." Bue nothing departs from itself. For what intervenes between self and self to the point of separating self from self! If it exists to rhe extent char it inheres in itself, then, because it always inheres, it always exists. Such a form is the soul. Therefore it is immortal. 
Somebody could object to this argument on the grounds that 5 just as fire which is hot in itself is always hot while it exists, and yet docs not exist always and so is not hot always in the absolute sense, so the soul's essence too, since properly and truly it is form subsisting in itself, therefore exists of itself, and because it exists of itself, it too always exists, that is, as long as it exists. Yer it docs nor always exist. Therefore it docs nor exist always. 


TI1erc arc two reasons why chis objection is ridiculous. In rhe 6 first place, it is self-contradictory when it is formulated in chis way: "the form exists of itself, therefore it always exists -that is, as long as it exists. Bur it docs not always exist." For there arc four statements here, of which the second which says "Therefore it al­ways exists" contradicts the one which asserts "But it docs not al­ways exist." Next, an objection like this is full of unnecessary repe­titions when it adds "that is, as long as it exists." For the "exists" in "as long as it exists" cannot be declared different from the first "ex­ists" in the assertion "it always exists." For existing in the same thing would be a cwin "exists" and a twin "existence"; and one par­ticular thing would not exist but two. Ir follows then chat the "ex­ists" in the addition "chat is, as long as ir exists" is the same as the "exists" which was used already when it was first argued "ir exists always." What arc the same must be treated in the same way. So, if the first "exists" is used absolutely, the second "exists" should be used absolutely wirhour the clause, "char is, as long as it exists." So it oughr to read "exists," "always exists," and "exists," whereas "chat is, as long as ir exists" should not be added. Or, if you add to the first "exists" the later "that is, as long as ir exists," you should also add it to the second "exists" which follows on "chat is, as long as it exists" and again add the "that is, as long as it exists" also ro chis third "exists," and again add "that is, as long as ir exists," and so on to infiniry. You will never find rhc first root of existing which is necessary for char thing to exist and to exist always. But what does not have the root ofexisting, is absolurcly nothing. But let us call a halt at this point. 

·nae separated form, like soul, exists in itself and therefore ex• ists always. Moreover, if existing and heating were completely identical, then, when you wrote, u Fire, because ic is hot in itself, is always hoc," you would immediately add, "to be hoc is che same as existing; therefore, fire always exists." But in acrualiry you cannot arrive at this conclusion, because co exist is not che same thing as to be hot, otherwise whatever exists would be hoc, and anything which stops being hot would stop existing; and this docs not hap• pen. So fire is always hot while it exists, because in a way it exists prior to being hoc. And because existence exists prior co being hoc and is other than being hoc, so heat appears co be present in che essence of fire by way of some mean: consequently, we posit first the fire's essence, then its existing, third its being hot. Or rather, fire's essence is allotted existence because it inheres in matter. For it lies hidden in a way in the bosom of matter before ic is brought to light. And just as it was buried in matter before it existed, so ic inheres in matter afterwards too, in order not to stop existing. le is allowed also co be hot because ic possesses existence. Wherefore ic scops being hoc when ic stops existing; and it stops existing when it scops inhering in matter. Bue che essence ofsoul, being unbound form, is allotted existence through itself: in it existence is rhe first and proper :ice of essence. Nor is there any bond which links its existence wich its essence, and which, being broken, causes de­struction. Although being hoc and existing alike accord with the fire's essence, given a particular condition, srill existing docs nor accord with rhe soul's essence conditionally bur rather absolurcly. Therefore, although fire always exists and is hot if a certain condi­tion pertains, yet soul always exists absoluccly. 
: X : 
Tenth proof: that soul of itself returns to God. 
Yet if there appears to be any condition by virtue of which soul ex-1 ists forever, it is not with any respect to bodies, whose support it docs not need, but with respect to the prime cause from which it derives. But chis respect, since it is fulfilled by the nature itself of the soul, in no way prevents the soul existing in itself, absolutely, unconditionally, and forever. We shall examine this in the follow• ing argument. 
Because all things depend on the universal first cause, individ-2 ual things rest in their own existence to the extent that they refer to the prime cause. They look to it in order to bear some likeness to it. 111at cause is purest act absolutely removed from every prop­erty of matter. Inferior things arc adjudged like chis act, not be­cause of their matter, but rather because of their form, which ex• iscs as a particular acc. Hence all things look to the first cause through their form.Thus whatever things are compounded of mat• tcr and form, like the clements and compound objects, look to the prime cause by way, not of themselves nor of their nature as a whole, but of that part ofthemselves only which is called form. 
Let us set up the proofthus. They exist in the same way as they 3 arc referred co the first principle. But they arc referred through another, therefore they exist through another. Things chat exist through another arc not unchanging; for abandoned to them• selves, they vanish into nothingness. So all things that exist and exist through another arc nothing in themselves. Clearly natural bodies arc like this. What about bodily forms? Obviously they arc like this. For form implanted in bodies loses its excellence and be­comes completely corporeal, since it has now submitted to all the conditions of body. 
The conditions of body arc cwo: extension in space and change 4 in time. Bue form immersed in bodies is extended along wich the body's magnitude and changes as the body changes. So, because it has been made entirely corporeal, having been deprived ofits pris­tine excellence, of itself it is almost nothing, as we said above, and it has no existence of its own: it is so bound up with matter that there is only the existence of chc whole. TI1crcfore, if it docs not exist of itself, it certainly docs not act of itself. Therefore, if ir is related co chc first cause, it will be related via something else, namely via char through which ic cxiscs. Bue ic exists through an­other higher form which is free from matter and on which it also depends continually in matter, just as the reflection in a mirror depends on a man's face. Through chis higher form it is also con­tinually related to the first cause. If the corporeal form is en­tirely through another, and since it is related co the first principle through another, then what is chat ocher entity through which the natural body and its form alike arc related to the first principle~ Surely it is chat third essence, which for a long time now we have placed above the qualities of bodies. Bue such an essence relates the qualities of bodies co God in the same way as it realizes chem in matter. But ir realizes chem by its activity. Its activity is mobile. So ic generates chem through morion, and relates chem through morion. Therefore it relates chem in a changeable way. 
It follows chac natural bodies and their forms, because chey are 5 related to God through another and through morion, exist neither in themselves nor as unchanging things, bur continually waver and perish. Bur the third essence, being the form of itself-or rather, being in itself a form, and a form free from matter -is related of itself co God. As it is related, so it exists. Therefore it exists of it­self too, but it is related through its essence. This is unchanging. So, being related to unchangeable God through its own unchange­able essence, it remains unchanging. This essence is the cause of its relation and the relation is rhe cause of its perfection. But it never abandons itself: therefore it never stops relating itself and never stops perfecting itself in relating. God's abundance always brims over; the third essence is always quaffing ar this cup. From the viewpoint ofdrink and drinker alike, therefore, the soul always drinks in existence and remains immortal. 
: XI : 
Eleventh proof that soul is not compounded from any potentiality into which it can be resolved. 
Just as generation results from the joining of form with matter, 1 so corruption comes from the separation of form from matter. Where no joining of chem occurs, no separation occurs. No such compounding occurs in rhc soul.U But let us pursue chis argument further. 
In the corruption of each thing, irs ace itself is lost; but some• 2 thing survives after the act which underlies it, a sort of receptive poccnrialicy. So corruption docs not end in nothing, any more than generation begins from nothing. An entity composed from form and matter is resolved into matter. The form coo which was ignited from the kindling of matter is reduced co chat kindling. But in soul its act is its existence: but its essence and substance is that potentiality itself which underlies the act of existing. For in independent forms, virtually no compounding is found ocher rhan from essence and existence, or rhe like. Essence plays the pare of matter and potentiality. Existence plays the part of form and act. If the soul is corrupted, its existence is utterly lost. But surely char is not true of the essence toof No! For no entity is resolved into nothing, because an entity which is so simple that it cannot be re· solved except into nothing is also such as it was made by God through creation from nothing. What is such is under God as its sole author. But God's life-giving and benign inAuence docs not destroy. So, if the soul is destroyed, though it loses its existence, yet its essence survives. H 
1l1is is clear too from the fact that the nobler the cnriry, the no• 3 bier the matter, and the nobler rhc form. Souls arc greatly superior to bodies. So under their existence, as under their form and act, lies hidden a m:mcr and potcntialiry-if any is hidden-which is superior to that under the form and existence ofany possible body. But in souls what plays the pare of prime matter and poccntialiry is their essence. Thus their essence is superior to the matter of bodies. The matter of bodies is incorruptible. So is it surprising if souls' essence is able to be incorruptibld Hence, if a soul can ever be imagined losing its existence, necessarily its essence and sub­stance would still survive. If this survives, it certainly exists. If it still exists, chen its existence is not yet lost. So, if the soul is said to be corrupted, it necessarily survives even after its corruption. Or rather, it even lives. For existing for the soul is nothing other than living. 
But were someone to argue that the very existence of soul is re• 4 solved into essence, and char essence no longer exists because it is without act (though the potenrialiry perchance survives some· where), we have to recall that chc essence cannot be reduced to matter or to matter's potenrialicy because neither is it made from matter as from a part of itself, nor docs it bud from matter's po• tcntialicy. Again, it cannot be resolved into the potentiality of any active cause, unless perchance into the power of God who alone created soul. Bur the rational soul docs not die by being resolved into the first life. But it would die if, when it was led back to God, it stopped being rational soul. Just as the shape impressed by a seal in wax is not destroyed when it is matched to the seal but its form is renewed, so che essence of soul. whenever it is moved towards the idea which God used to allocate it to a particular species of ex• istencc, is confirmed in its pristine existence. The later act is im­measurably strengthened by the first act. For how can God be the goal towards which corruption aims when He is the starting point of activity from whom and by whom all creation and generation derives? How docs God, who is pure act, at che soul's birth con­tribute to the composition of the soul such that, just :ts bodily form results from the potentiality of matter and from act added co chat potentiality, and just as the form's act is eventually resolved back into that potentiality, so from a sort of potentiality of God and from an act added to it comes the rational soul, which is at last resolved into the potentiality of God as though into matter? For He who is the prime act never plays the role of matter. 
Someone will allege that the essence of soul is resolved neither 5 into matter nor into God, but that, once its former existence is re­moved, it withdraws straightway into itself. But just as corporeal matter cannot exist without corporeal ace, so spiritual matter can• not exist apart from spiritual act. So essence, which is the matter of spiritual beings and relates to spiritual existence :ts to some act, is never separated from existence, from spiricual existence, I re­peat, unless perhaps there is someone who maintains chat the es• sence of soul, when it doffs one existence, dons another, and that the essence introduces co chis spiritual existence the same changes as matter introduces co its forms. Bur chis is talking nonsense, both because the essence ofspiritual beings is more stable than che matter of corporeal entities, and because che essence ofsoul. being the proper rational principle of the soul, does not look co different existences with complete indifference, but only to cnsoulcd exis­tence in accord with one particular species, namely that of soul. Common matter can exist without this or that act of existence: but particular matter cannot exist without ics own particular act. So the essence of a soul in a particular species of soul will never receive the act of another species ofsoul, nor will it pass from one soul co another within the same species: otherwise it would be as changeable as the matter of bodies. Or rather, if the matter of the heavens, as most people maintain, is satisfied with the same form forever, is it surprising that the spiritual matter of soul should be satisfied forever with the same act of existing? That essence is life and this existence is living. Therefore it lives forcvcr. 15 
XII 
Twelfth proof that soul in itself has no potentiality for non-existence. 
Nothing is ever corrupted unless it has the potentiality for non-ex• istcncc in itself. 16 For if it were incapable of not existing, it would never stop existing. Soul has no such potentiality, since soul for the Platonisrs is nothing ocher than simple form, subsisting in it• self, complete and perfect in its essence, and contributing to mak· ing the species of what has soul. The act of existing is there in the form, complete and perfect, since every single thing exists through the completeness ofits form. So the proper subject of its existence there is its form and essence. Bur where will the potentiality for not existing be, which is the opposite ofexisting? Surely not in its existence itself? Then how docs one opposite have the power to receive another opposite? Surely it docs not receive it in its es­sence? No, not here. For, if the essence, insofar as it is form, sim• plc and complete, is the proper substrate of its existence, how does it have the porenriality for nor existing, which is said to be the op· posite of existing? For how does the specific subst:mce of fire, which is the proper substrate of heat as such, possess a potential­ity for sustaining cold, a potentiality through which it both re• ccivcs cold and remains fire? Yer in these corporeal and mortal substances rhe potentiality for nor existing, is nor to the extent that, in their own species, they arc complete substances endowed with form (for they exist precisely because of this), but to the ex­tent that prime matter, which is never stable under such a form, underlies them. This matter is absent from soul. So nowhere in soul is found the potcnrialiry for nor existing. Therefore soul is immortal. Bur let us elaborate this argument. 
In objects composed of form and matter, it happens char rhe 1 matter in a way precedes the resulring work. For who doubts char matter has a kind of existence before it is given form~ Accepting chis matter as preceding in a certain sense the making of the work, I ask whether the work coming to be from rhe nature of chis mat• tcr is necessary, or impossible, or perhaps possible. It cannot be necessary, because matter's power of itself would immediately be­stow necessity on the work, and it would not need some higher form-giver. But in fact it docs need one, because what is without form cannot form itself. So, as far as matter is concerned, the work-co-be is nor necessary. Is it then impossibld Surely nor. For rhen rhc matter would be so unsuited to the work that it would never be brought to its form and completion. If. as regards matter, the work awaiting completion is neither necessary nor ycr impossi• blc, it must be possible; for the possible is half-way between the two extremes, that is, between existence and non-existence. For if from matter's nature existence only were possible, indubitably the work would be neccss:try; bur if from this same matter's nature only non-existence were possible, rhcn the work would be impossi• ble too. 
Therefore, since from the nature of matter it is possible for the 3 work equally to exist or not to exist, then it is evident that in the matter, insofar as it is there to make the work, dwells the potenti­ality equally for existence :ind for non-existence. But since matter is simple and not compounded from several natures, dwelling in the same n:tturc of m:trtcr is the potentiality for both existence and non-existence, because it is indifferent co both and is not in it­self bound co the one or co the other. It needs the higher agent which, by forming it, can determine ir for existence. From the agent it receives the form of lion and so becomes a lion; the matter ofchc lion, which had earlier possessed in itself the potentiality to be and not to be a lion, is now determined to be a lion. Docs that same potentiality, indifferent to either possibility, still remain in the prime matter? If it did not, rhc nature of macccr would cease at once. Nothing would come into existence from matter and stay in existence, if, as soon as it becomes something, prime matter loses its nature and perishes. Accordingly, once rhc lion is born, since the same potentiality with regard to the species remains nor in the secondary matter pertaining to the lion, bur in the prime macrcr-1 mean the potcnriality equally for existence and non-ex­istence -then what happens is char, just as the lion through this potentiality began ro exist at one point when it did nor exist be­fore, so through this same potentiality it may cease to exist at some point after it has existed. Since the potentiality is open to both extremes, either it resorts co neither or it resorts equally and in turn to both; and just as it is turned from non-existence to exis­tence, so is it turned again from existence to non-existence. Hence derives the corruption of bodily things. 
On the other hand, rational soul, since it is simple form from which motion arises in composite things, cannot have been made from some pre-existent matter and a subsequent form. Since it is form subsisting in itself independently of matter, and since it pro­ceeds above and below matter in makingjudgments, it is nor com­posed from some potentiality of matter, as if chis were the soul's foundation, and then from an act added to the potentiality, as if this were the soul's perfection. So it is not made and docs not exist from matter. If it is such, it came from nothing into the light. So God is its sole creator, as we have shown elsewhere. Yet if it could not have been made, certainly it would never have been made. So the potentiality for being born preceded our soul. Where was that potencialicy located? Not in the soul which was not yet; nor in a part of the soul, because it is simple and made all at one rime and not in parts; nor in some matter, for the soul does not depend on matter; nor in nothing, for the potentiality for existence is not based in nothing. For how can one opposite serve as the basis of another and contradictory oppositd Existence and non-existence, however, arc contradictories. The remaining possibility is that this potentiality is based in God, who alone is the creator of soul. 
Therefore the potentiality for existing by means of which soul 5 is brought into existence is God Himself, alone, immortal and un­changing. But act corresponds harmoniously to potentiality. So the act corresponding to that divine potentiality is unchanging in essence. Such an act is soul. Just as in God the potentiality by means of which He can create soul and soul can be created is the same, so in soul it is the same act, the same effort, by means of which soul subsists in its own nature and God plants soul in that nature. Hence it is with no less desire that God plants soul in soul's narure than soul subsists in chat nature. Since the soul is subject only to God, if it has to be destroyed by something, it must be by Him. But it cannot be destroyed by Him. For how will the efficient and preserving cause of something also turn out to be the corrupting cause of it? Or how is the good itself destruc­tive of anything? Or how is the first life, the infinite life, the origin of something's death? Someone will argue: God docs not destroy soul by introducing some new power, but by withdrawing the power previously given co it, that is, by removing His influence by means of which the soul had lived. In the same way a man who creates his own image by looking into a mirror, stops creating the image when he turns his face aside. Bue in this case such cannot happen, as we showed a little while ago. 
Again, if God pours life into the soul at one point and not ac 6 the next, then a change has occurred from pouring to not pouring. Is ir the soul, I ask, which stops imbibing life, or God who scops pouring it in~ The soul docs not srop imbibing; for rhc pouring of life is into rhe very essence of soul, since life is the first :1.ct of the essence :1.s soon :1.s it h:1.s received existence. The essence of soul docs not change, bcc:1.usc ir depends dircccly on God who docs not change. Because it is perfected in srabiliry and repose, ic is rrou• bled by movement: it bys hold on what is unchanging, governs whar is fleecing, h:1.lcs whar is in morion, gathers together whar is scattered, reconciles what is in conflict. Thar porcmialiry equally disposed to existence and non-existence, chc kind char is in bodies and which is the starring point of all change, is nor in soul. So che soul's essence never stops receiving rhe act of life. God never stops pouring it forth. For God has signified that at some point He will only cease ro pour His power into chose things alone wherein from the beginning He has implanted the proclivity for not existing. 
Moreover, God, rhc founder of nature, never rakes from any• thing what is irs own property. Life is rhc property of soul; and by life I mean life everlasting, because insofar as ir is rational, soul d:iily brings to birth ( even without training or experience and sim• ply through the power ofits own nature) new and absolute species whereby it is led ro che threshold of the eternal ideas. If it is natu­ral for rational soul to ascend cowards the ideas, rhen it is natural for it co find repose in rhc ideas. This is in order char, just as it has lived naturally by chem, so it may naturally live in chem; and that he who acts by nature continually with regard ro eternal things may ar some point acr by nature eternally in eternal things. Because each idea is eternal life, he who can attain, ideally attain, by his own nature an idea, can also attain, eternally attain, crer• nal life. 
• BOOK V • CHAPTER XIII · 
: XIII : 
Thirteenth proof: that soi,/ accepts existencefrom God without an intermediary. 
Although Plotinus, Proclus, and several other Platonists believe 1 that soul is created by angel, I more willingly follow Dionysius the Areopagite, Origcn, and Augustine, the most excellent of the Platonists, who think that soul was created by God alonc.17 I am confident that their position can be proved by chc following argument. 
Soul is form so simple and so independent chat it is neither 2 composed from many parts nor wrenched from rhe entrails of matter. So when ic comes inco existence it cannot be generated from any previously existing things. For it is formed neither from different things that arc first fur apart and then forced together, since it lacks parts; nor from matter's kindling that was first un­formed then formed, since it is above matter. Therefore it comes into existence from nothing. To make something fi-om nothing be­longs solely to God. 18 For the order of causes can be discovered from the order of effects; for effects arc made conformable to their causes. Therefore we should lead the proper effects back to their proper causes, and what is found common in all the proper effects we should refer to the common cause of all. 
Thus, since the existence common co all is found in all things 3 besides the conditions proper co chem individually, we have to ad­duce for the individual conditions and qualities individual causes, but for the existence ( which is alone common to chem all) one cause and one common to all. The cause common to all is the one God Himself. So God is truly the cause of cxisrcncc.19 Bue there arc causes ocher than God for existing as chis or that, in this way or that way. That you exist, you have from God alone. That you arc human, you owe ro a human being too; that you arc warm, to a fire. God gives existence to His works, while other causes, differ­ing among themselves, contribute rhc various modes of existence, and even these by the power ofGod.20 
The existence that comes after nothing is called absolute exis-4 tence. For immediately after nothing comes existence in its sim­plicity. Succeeding it is this or that existence, such or such an exis­tence, being a human being, for instance, or a horse, being white or black. For something cannot become this or that or such unless it exists prior to becoming this or that or such. So this or rhat or such an existence docs not follow immediately upon nothing, but comes after simple and absolute existence. Therefore, since it is God's alone to give ro all creatures this common and absolute exis­tence, but since this existence comes after nothing and before all modes ofexisting, then it will be the office of God alone to bring something into existence from nothing in order that what is given first to all things, namely existence itself, may derive from the first cause, and the gifts that arc second and third from the causes chat follow.11 
Certainly, what participates in some nature cannot produce chat ; nature in an absolute sense, since what has some quality by partic­ipation necessarily follows what has it absolutely. Or rather, it is whatever it is through char absolute, and were chis participant co generate that absolute, what is later would certainly generate a thing prior to itself, and would even generate the cause of itself when it generated itself. Thus Ariscon, because he was not che ab­solute man but this man Ariston made in a particular kind ofmat· ter, did not beget humanity in an absolute sense, but rather begot this man, Plato, and in a particular kind of matter. 22 But because, insofar as it pertains co the nature of existing, whatever is below God participates in His existence and does not possess it abso­lutely but is determined for a particular existence in a particular essence and species, then it follows chat nothing that is subject to God can bring forth existence itself, but rather gives a certain por• tion of matter a particular mode ofexisting. That is why it always needs an earlier foundation for its work. 23 
In whatever it docs, moreover, art like nature brings forth from 6 a certain potentiality into act. A sculptor takes scone prepared to become a statue (in that it contains somehow rhe statue in poten­tiality) and fashions the statue in acc. A man begets a man from the seed in whose potentiality is a man. The matter from which arr and nature fashion something is sometimes very malleable and ready for the work, sometimes less well suited, such chat matter's potentiality is sometimes less, sometimes more distant from the ace of rhe work to be accomplished. The potentiality of air is not far from the effect [or act] offire, but the potentiality of water is a long way from it. Hence it is easy to light fire from air but difficult from water. It is obvious, then, that rhe agent has to be the more powerful the further the distance between the potentiality and the act-the distance from the one to the other which is rhe goal of his work. The distance between nothing and existence is infinite, because in nothing there is no ratio at all to existence, and because no greater distance than chis can exist or be thought to exist. The only power that can transcend the distance without ratio and limit is that which has no ratio to other powers and no limit. This power is God alone. For all other things arc exceeded by the power of God. God alone brings something from nothing into existence.2~ 
Furthermore, every thing other than God Himself is called a creature by theologians, and is created necessarily from four com• 7 ponents. This is the reason the Pythagoreans attribute four cle­ments not only to bodies bur also in a way to spiritual beings, since both consist ofessence, existence, power, and action. In chem certainly essence is one thing, existence another; for existence is rhe act of essence. But if, in addition to this act, no essence were there ro which such an act could ding, ir would be pure and infinite act, because not circumscribed by anything. But this is God alone. Again, rhc existence would be free from another's par· ticipation entirely. But all char is such is unique in nature. So it is proper to God alone. A creature rightly is not its own existence, because it cannot be its own act, since it has in itself, in char it is subject to God, some admixture of passive potentiality. Bur poten­tiality is the opposite ofact. Bur since activity differs from essence more than existence docs (for essence exists before it enacts some· thing), then where essence is distinct from existence, activity is even more distinct from essence. Activity is the act of the essential power, as existence is the act of the essence. But since the created essence is not its own act, so neither is its own activity, otherwise such activity would be subsisting in itself completely free of the participant's every limit. \Vhar is such, we have argued, exists as something unique and infinite. 
Bue docs activity differ from existence just as it differs demon• 8 strably from essence~ Wirhour a doubt. There arc two sorts ofac­tivity: one flows outside the agent, like heating; another remains wirhin, like knowledge and will. It can hardly be disputed chat the activity which flows outside is distinct from existence, which never flows our from rhc thing itself. The activity which remains within also differs from existence in char a creature's existence is confined co a definite natural species. [BurJ such internal activity ranges through many genera; or rather, the intelligence and will range through infinite genera. For the object of the first is truth itself, and of the second, goodness itself. The true and rhe good extend ar lease as far as what is called being. But acrivity derives rhe spe­cies fi-om the object. So internal activity of chis kind is clothed with the species of all things. But does activity differ from power and power from essence and exisccnccf Yes. Firstly, because ace is always opposed to potentiality, activity which is ace differs from power and essence which arc kinds of potentiality; and power differs both from existence which is ace and from essence (because porcnrialitics arc distinguished by their aces, since a proper pocen­ciality looks to its proper :1.ct). The :1.ct of essence is existence; the 
act of power is activity. So essence and power arc as different from 
each other as existence and activity. 
To wh:1.t end chcse many arguments? So th:1.t you may under• 9 st:1.nd chat che activity of any creature inheres in its power, and the power and existence inheres in its essence; and that no creature aces through ics substance direccly, bur through the active power which is a quality or :1.ccidenc, since ic is complcccly distinguished from the substance. So whenever ic docs something, it gives birth to certain qualities direccly and gives them the existence it has it• self, that is, existence always inhering in :1.nother. But such things need a pre-existent foundation. Things needing a found:1.rion arc not cre:1.rcd from nothing. No creature, therefore, creates anything. Properly so. For its activity and power, since they inhere in an­other (and whatever inheres docs not stay free and whole, bur is received according to the capacity of the receiver), arc bounded within the limits of their subject. But creation requires an infinite active power. Therefore the soul is created by God alone. 
Maybe someone will suppose that the soul is made by God in 10 such a way that it is accomplished with an angel acting as inrerme• diary and that in chis creation God is the craftsman and the angel the instrument. This view is obviously :1.bsurd because the nature of an instrument requires: a) that having been moved by another it moves another; b) chat it affects some subject; and c) chat ic in­troduces the form of the princip:1.l agent into the subject over an interval of rime. Creation, however, requires no subject, and occurs without motion or time. Furthermore, if the work of creation re­quires unlimited power, what could be more absurd chan co h:1.ve the power necessary to do chis, which in God is unlimited, first be limited in an angel, whose nature is limited, and then enact the very work which requires unlimited power~ The conclusion from the foregoing is that soul is created by God on high without an in• termediary. 
Why :tren't the :ingcl and the soul togcther equal in perfection, 11 since both depend on God without an intermediary? 111c answer is dm God produces :ingcl under one idea and rational principle, bur soul under another: angel under a loftier idea, soul under a lower one. Similarly, a man and a horse painted by the same p:iinrcr arc not equally beautiful (for a man's shape is more be:iuti• ful than a horse's). This is because the painter painted the man's picture :iccording to the model in his mind which was more beau· tiful than that of the horse. 
Let us now draw this discussion to a close as follows. If the cs• 12 sence of soul is made dirccrly by God, no mean intervenes be­tween it and God who preserves it, nothing char can separate it from its preserver. And if it needs God alone to be created, it needs Him alone ro remain, because God preserves the things He has created through the same power He uses to create them. Therefore,just as soul has proceeded from God's infinite goodness out of nothing into existence, so it remains through th:tt same goodness far from nothing in existence. This is in order chat the life closest to God may resemble the life divine; and ic will be such at lase, if the soul has no beginning or end (like God); or at lease has no end. 
The view of Timaeus and Plato is that God, the world's ar-13 tificer, creates His works by way of ideas,2s that is, models and in• dependent r:ttional principles, and so whatever is created directly by way of such or such an idea always remains such, whereas what is created subsequently is nor necessarily such for always bur only for a time. For the effect closest to the cause must emerge, they say, most like the cause, while the remoter effect must always rurn our to be less like and in the end completely unlike. By the same measure the idea is the power simultaneously and eternally in it• self; the power which immediately succeeds is not in itself bur in another, though forever; and the power which succeeds in turn 
89 will remain neither in itself nor ofits own nature forever the same or similar. 
Since, therefore, the rational soul is created from the idea oflife 14 without an intermediary, it is an ever-living form with a power like that of its immediate source. But the irrational soul. since it origi­nates from the rational soul, lives in itself only for a period of time. For what is created by the idea alone is made by an entirely unchanging action and derives an unchanging essence from it. Bue what is born from the idea by way of the soul as intermediary, be­cause it is generated by a changing action, is forced to derive from it what is in itself a changing nature. I say "in itself" because Timaeus and Plato suppose the life imprinted in the aetherial ve­hicle, as in an eternal mirror, always accompanies the soul that is imprinting it, while the life imprinted in the composite and fallen body docs nor always accompany it.26 Certainly, they chink that the actherial body immediately proximate co the soul is perpetu­ally animated by the ever-living substance of the soul, while the el­emental body receives life from it at a point in time and by way of the aetherial body. But more of chis elsewhere. 
: XIV : 
Fo11rteenth proof: that soul of itself is life. 
Soul is essence; it is also life. We have shown in our earlier proofs 1 chat it is immortal because it is an essence existing in itself. but that it is immortal because it is a life living in itself is the topic of our present argument. 
Soul from its very essence is life, because all char is in it is life. 2 For if anything char was not life were in it, char would not be part of soul, and the whole would be called an ensouled something rather than soul. So Ice us .1dmic chat che entire essence of soul is life. Ific is life entire, it muse ccrc.1inly be called life in itself, life formally.27 For what lives through .1nochcr, and is not living through itself, is compounded from cwo p.1rcs: from ics own na­ture which in itself is not alive, and &om chat life it has received from elsewhere. Hence if wh.1c lives through .1nochcr is not life en­tire, ir follows ch.1c what is life entire lives through itself. 11mcforc soul which is life entire lives through itself, especially since it is moved through itself. Ifchis is so, ic is life in itself. The essence of soul is therefore life. One sign of chis is cl1.1c co whatever it is pres­ent it gives life, as though it were in itself chc very thing it is giving to another. Hence, when it is nor present, rhe body stops being alive, bur as long as it is present co rhe body, ir never ceases for a moment co perform the works of life by giving life co che body. Wherefore the eternal :ice ofsoul is giving life. Eternal action is a thing's proper action. Therefore che proper action of soul is to give life. To give life is proper co life itself just as co hear is proper co hear. Therefore the essence of soul is life. 
Herc is another conjectural inference. Soul gives a body life im-3 mediately it is ready for it. So it gives life from either its existence, or desire, or knowledge and deliberation. Ifsoul were co give life co the body by its knowledge and delibcracion, then everybody would know at any moment what rhe soul was begetting and nourishing in its innermost pares, and about the internal workings of che body. And unless they were conscious of chem, they would not happen. Docs the soul give life by its desire:' Again the answer is no, otherwise the rational soul would remain in the body just so long as ic wanted co be there, and one mat hated being familiar with the body would immediately depart from the body. It re­mains then for soul to give life to the body by irs existence, in other words by its natural power. Ifit gives life by irs existence, then through its essence it is life or living, just as what gives heat by its existence is heat or heating through its essence or power. 
• BOOK V • CHAPTER xrv . 
Conclude then that the essence of soul is some kind oflife. But if you arc reluctant to call it life living through itself, as you normally speak of heat as heating through itself, then at least you might be compelled by the arguments above to admit that soul is a vital substance with its own life, just as you call fire a substance on fire with its own heat. It is of no concern co me which of these views you accept. For the same sought-for conclusion follows fi-om either. 
From the above arguments I myself am led to call the soul in it• self life, and I mean natural life and living form. But death in a way is said to be the opposite of life and living form, or to be some sort of death-bringing quality, just as coldness is the contrary co heat and dryness to humidity. But it is the nature of opposite forms that one of them cannot accept the other -for instance, heat cannot accept cold-and that the substance to which one of the forms is proper cannot also accept another form opposite to its own form. For instance, fire, to which hear is proper, docs nor ac­cept cold in order to be simultaneously both fire and cold; but heat and fire alike depart or arc destroyed at the onset of cold rather than the heat or fire becoming cold. So each is "uncoldable" -co coin a word-since neither can have any part in cold. Similarly soul. because either it is natural life itself or has life as its natural actendanc, docs nor admit death, its opposite, as I said. If it docs nor admit death, it is quite deathless, just as fire, because it docs not accept cold, is uncoldable. If uncoldable were the same as in­destructible, then fire, just as it cannot become cold, would also not be destroyed: it is destroyed rather than becoming cold. But since deathless is the same as indestructible, the soul, which is said to be deathless in not admitting death, is also indestructible. Therefore when death comes, the soul departs but is not de­stroyed. The whole of the above discussion is epitomized in these words of Zoroaster: "It remains immortal and is the mistress of life."28 Ir is as though he were saying that the soul remains immor­
tal because it has life as its attendant, just as the sun has light, and a comet its tresses. 
Herc some Srraco2~ or some Epicurean will object: Surely soul 5 docs not receive death because, when a death-dealing quality ap• proaches, soul departs and ceases to exist. Ifir ceases to exist, then patently it receives nothing. But we arc not so stupid, my Epicu• rcan, as to be unaware that death cannot be sustained by anything, borh because death itself is nothing (and what docs not exist can• nor be received), and because neither the living nor the dead can receive it: the living, because as long as they live they arc absent from death; and the dead. because if they do not exist, as you yourself suppose, they sustain nothing, and if they survive, as we believe, they arc also absent from death. Let us stop playing with words. Listen to what we mean when we declare that the soul docs nor sustain death: we mean that it docs not admit in itself any death-dealing quality by which it might cease to live. Clearly, op• posite qualities do not mutually receive each other; for they put each ocher to flight and flee in turn. So heat in its own nature nor only docs nor sustain cold, it docs not even approach where cold is. For things chat naturally differ by the widest margin repel and flee from each other by the widest margin. Given that these forms arc naturally such, rhcn if they existed in rheir pure and natural state alone and were elms each ocher's opposites as they arc now, they would never approach each ocher. For nature would keep chem apart, and no intermediary would be there to act as their reconciler. Such would surely be the case if hear subsisted in itself, apart from matter, such chat it had nothing else mingled with it except heat; and cold likewise. In actual fact heat resides in matter, which in its own nature is no less ready for cold than for heat; when cold approaches, it opens its bosom. Cold enters its embrace and banishes heat; and once heat is driven out it is extinguished, since it was brought forth into existence by its author on condition char it would remain only as long as it were cherished in the 
• BOOK V • CHAPTER XIV · 
bosom of matter. Thus forms which arc sustlincd by matter, even if they do not sustain forms opposed to them, arc nevertheless de­stroyed by chose opposing forms' impetuous morion and proxim• ity. Bue the forms which rcmlin in d1cmselvcs, even if they seem to inhere in matter, sustain m:mcr rather than being sustained by it; they cannot admit a power contrary ro themselves. Bue if some power arrives in the lap of matter, it defiles the qualities and forms bound to matter, bur docs not touch the form which towers above matter. 
Such a form is soul. And I mean rational soul, which, since it is 6 
the source of morion and is the mover of bodies, cannot be 
changed by bodies from its own scare of rest. And since it has che 
life innate ro its species as its own, it lives forever and without che 
labor of living, especially as long as it lives on its own. But when it 
comes close to body, then irrational life, if I may speak Pla• 
tonically, streams our of it, like a shadow. Rational soul is me true 
soul and che source of animate life, and it supplies such a life not 
only for a time to the body but to a much greater degree forever to 
, 
itself. This is because it never abandons itself: it is not compelled 
to abandon itself by the body, whose quality does nor cross over into incorporeal form; nor aglin is it compelled to the same by souls, whose office is to give life, not to cake it away. Such indubi­tably is adjudged the rational soul. 
TI1c irrational soul. on che other hand, is not a true soul, as it is 7 neither a true essence nor a rruc life. It is not a true essence be­cause it docs not exist in itself, since it docs not operate on its own and docs nothing without rhe body's instruments. It is not a true life because it is robbed ofliberty of movement. For it is not led by itself, but forcibly dragged by chc objects presented to che senses. For chis reason many Platoniscs say that me rational soul is both a soul and a subsisting life giving life from itself to the body. However, they mink rhar the irrational soul is a form ramcr, an animation and vivifying of me body. Xcnocratcs, Speusippus, Numcnius, and Plorinus suppose chis form is also immortal, bur Porphyry, Produs, and many ochers deny it.10 
We should not be surprised if many Platonists believe some 8 souls arc true, ochers false, since the diversity of things is linked by appropriate intervals. God is che true good; angel is the image of goodness bur true intellect; rational soul is chc image of intellect but true soul; irrational soul is che image of soul bur true nature; quality, which is divided up in matter, is chc image of nature bur che true instrument of natural agents. We should remember chat chose who chink char our lower souls arc eternal, and rhc souls of plants coo, arc following rhc Egyptians and Pythagoreans who suppose: a) chat human souls arc [angelic] minds fallen into the reason and sense, b) char souls of beasts arc our human souls fallen entirely into sense and generation, and finally c) char souls of plants arc these same souls which have fallen completely into the power of generation. They also suppose chat all these souls can be returned co the higher levels. This is what Empedoclcs, Timaeus of Locri, Origcn, and Plocinus seem ro have mcant.11 Bue chat is their concern. Ler us pursue the matter in hand. 

: xv : 
Fifteenth proof: that life is s11perior to body. 
The rational soul is true, natural life. True life in itself gives form 1 to and rules rhc body, and is therefore far superior to the body. However much the body shifts from one quality co another or is even divided up into a thousand pares, it never stops being body; for the nature of body always stays divisible since its parts arc end­lessly divided inco smaller parts. Therefore a fortiori rational soul 
(which is the true life of the body), however much it changes, never stops being life. 
We think chat the strength of chis argument consists mainly in l the fact chat the third essence, which is the abode of rational souls, has three special gifts, since it occupies the universal intermediary position. The first gift is chat chc true images of things divine arc resplendent in it. TI1e second is that it gives form to and preserves the whole corporeal machine. TI1e third is that it mutually rccon• cilcs things divine and corporeal. All three gifts show that the soul is eternal. The first gift docs so, because, if within the genus of bodies some arc eternal -those in which dwell the shadows of things divine-, afortiori rational souls arc eternal, being the most outstanding of all souls in whom dwell the eternal images of things divine. For in things divine, life comes before splendor, be­cause their splendor is both a reflection and a pouring forth of life. So the rich stream of immortal life flows from them into soul be­fore the splendor of the divine images docs. The second gift shows that soul is eternal, because, if the rational soul is the principle of both forming and preserving, it can lose neither its own form nor· natural constancy. Given char rhe genus of anim:nc things as a whole is superior to the genus of body as a whole, and that in all the world's members some corporeal entities arc eternal, it is surely probable that in all these dwell eternal souls. For who will deny char the genus of souls has an eternal "head" in which dwell rational souls, seeing that the corporeal world everywhere has some eternal members? The third gifr shows the soul is eternal, because, if the soul is the source of the reconciling and bonding of all things, it cannot be undone or pulled apart. For if the bond of all is unbound, what can be bound further? 
We will confirm these Platonic mysteries by citing Aurelius 3 
Augustine's view as follows.12 If che rational soul died when the 
body perished, then necessarily ic would change when the body 
changed. But ic cannot be changed by the body, for it is itself the 
• BOOK V • CHAPTER XV · 
principle of morion. So when it seems to be changed by the body, then it is itself changing the body and guiding itself as it wills. If the soul most often moves the body while remaining itself un• moved, then afortiori, since it arrests and contains the body, it ar• rests and contains itself. For what remains completely unmoved in moving another is always able to remain unmoved in arresting and containing itself. For who is unaware char when a body (our own or another) is moved by chc rational soul. both the movement and what is moved alike do not simultaneously possess all that is theirs, but slip directly from the future into the present and inro the past; bur that in the soul the purpose or plan of the whole work is then simultaneously present and unchanging: [chat is,] the conccprionJ1 of the present work, the memory of the past work, and the expectation of rhc future work~ The intention of the soul is concerned with things which do not yet exist when it unites chose char arc not yet with those that arc no longer. With regard to things temporal it is above time, and with regard co things mov• able it is immobile. So with regard co things mortal why is its sub­stance not immortal~ Or rather why, in attaining eternal things, docs it not itself become eternal, since in treating ofthings mobile 
it scays immobile? 
"Moreover, it is nor so much what is in the mass of the body chat makes it a body as what is in the form. For it is more a body to the extent it is better formed and more beautiful, and less so to the extent it is more hideous and deformed, a defect which is the result not of the diminution of the mass buc of the removal of the form.''H If this is so, we must suppose char the rational soul -by which the form through which a body exists, as docs the conncc• cion of the pares through which it exists, is given as a principle to chc body-can never be deprived of its own form or of the unity through which it exists and stays a rational soul. This is because a body is never stripped of all form and unity through which it ex• ists, and stays a body. Nor yet can a soul shift from species to spc· cies like a body. For change descends from soul ro body, and soul is more stable than body. So if body always remains within the gc• nus body, then soul always remains within the species soul; and within that species of soul, it will nor shift from one soul co an• other, for the matter through which such change could occur docs not underlie it. "If such change docs not occur and no rational soul can exist unless it lives, certainly the rational soul never 
dics."35 
"But16 if someone were to say that the rational soul has to fear, 5 not this sort of death which makes what is something become nothing, but chc sort which makes us describe as dead chose things that arc without life, Ice him note that nothing lacks itself. But rational soul is a sort of life. So what is ensouled is alive, but ail without soul that could be cnsoulcd is understood as dead, that is, as devoid of life. Therefore rational soul cannot die. For if it can lack life, it is not true soul, but an cnsoulcd entity or some im• itation of soul. Bue if char is absurd, much less should rational soul fear the genus of death, because it certainly should not fear the genus of life. In short, ifsoul dies when life leaves it, then the life which leaves it is much better understood as the true soul inas• much as whatever is left by the life is not now the soul; rather the soul is the life itself which leaves it. For whatever has been left by life is said to be dead, meaning it has been left by soul. Bur the life which leaves the things which die, because it is rational soul itself, docs not leave itself. 
"Rational soul docs not die, unless perchance we arc forced to 6 believe chat the true life (is) some tempering of the body or some• thing following chat tempering, as Aristoxenus and Dicacarchus supposed.17 To be sure, they would never have entertained such a view if they had been able to evaluate che things char truly exist and endure as unchangeable realities wich char same rational soul, one separated from contact with bodies and purged. For who, upon reflection, has not found chat he has understood the more clearly to the extent he has been able to subdue and completely di­vert his mind's attention from the body's senses? Bur if soul per­tained to the tempering of the body, this could not happen. For this tempering thing, which neither had its own nature nor sub­sisted in itself, but existed in a corporeal substrate inseparably as a corporeal form, would try neither to turn itself in any manner away from that same body in order to perceive the inrclligiblcs, nor to gaze upon chem to the extent ic was able to gaze upon the body, nor to become better and more noble because ofthat vision. In no way can such a form, or even the tempering itself ofa body which is the result ofa mingling of rhe four natures char make up the same body, turn itself away from the substrate in which it in• separably exists." Furthermore, since the harmony of the humors is an accidental compound, if the soul were such a harmony or something dependent on it, in no way would it understand, or de­sire, or attain the rational principles of substances and of uncom­pounded things. 
"Furthermore,'~ the objects which the rational soul understands 7 when it turns away from body arc clearly not corporeal; yet rhey exist to the fullest possible degree, for they always exist in the same manner. And nothing could be more absurd than to say that what we see with our eyes exists, but what we sec with our intelli­gence docs nor exist, since it is insane to doubt that the under­standing is preferred, incomparably so, to the eyes. Bur when the soul secs these objects which arc understood and which exist in the same manner, and secs them without some instrument, it sufficiently shows chat it has been joined to chem in a wonderful and similarly incomparable way, that is, without regard to place. For either the intelligibles arc in the rational soul. or the soul is in chem, or both subsist in themselves." 
If it is the first option, the rational soul is not the body's har• 8 mony nor delivered over to chat harmony. For whatever is such cannot be separated from the body as from its subject, and there• 
fore whatever is in the soul is as tied to the body as it is. But the human body is mutable, so those rational principles of things which exist in the contemplating soul will be mutable, if the soul is tied to the mutable body. But those mional principles of things cannot be mutable. For it is always true in the same way that 2+4=6 and that the ratio of 2:4 is the same as that of 4:8, and chc rest of chc countless examples of this kind. Such rational prin• ciplcs arc inseparably present in the soul which uses chem always and at a moment's notice when it chooses to. 19 The art of reason• ing, which can in no way be separated from the rational soul, de­pends on them. For if artful reasoning or the rational art, which is the union of all the rational principles, is going to be separated from the soul. it will exist either nowhere or in something chat is not living or in something living. One cannot say that the eternal and unchangeable rational principles exist nowhere. And it is im­possible too that true rational principles should be in some non• living thing, for life is the basis of reason. But if artful reasoning were to migrate from one life to another, it would never do this more convenicncly than when someone teaches ocher people. But since this docs not happen (for no one forgets in teaching others), this migration docs not occur. Therefore the art of reasoning is in• separably present in the soul. Ir would be present too in the body. if the soul were the body's harmony. For then the reasoning and the soul alike would be mutable, like the body. But since such rea· soning is unchanging, and so the essence of a soul in which it in• heres as in a subject is unchanging, soul is not the tempering of body. Enough for the first of the above options where one con• cedes that the rational principles arc present in soul. 
Furthermore, if someone grants the second option, namely that the rational soul is present in the principles, the same conclusion follows. For how is soul the tempering of body if it is in things' ra• tional principle and separated from body as from its subject, since a body's tempering cannot be anywhere bur in the body~ If you grant the third of the options, namely that both entities, the soul and the rational principle of things alike, arc each a substance sub­sisting in itself, then soul will subsist on its own and will not be tied to the tempering of body. Lastly, whichever of the three op• tions you accept, this one overriding argument persuades us chat soul docs not rest in the body's complexion as in its origin, namely that when we philosophize, the soul would not mix so eagerly, so readily, so assiduously with the unchanging rational principles, ig• noring the changeable body, nor would it be better when it is in chem than when it is in che body. But it is better in them than in the body to the degree that it lives more nobly in them than in che body. It lives more nobly to the degree ic operates more perfectly. But ic operates more perfeccly in che principles, because it under· stands more truly, desires more peacefully, and enjoys more sweecly, fully, and imperturbably. And since often, even as the body is in harmony with itself, the soul is unruned by contempla• tion or moral virtue, or, conversely, the soul is in harmony even as 
the body is ouc of rune, the person who does not see that chc soul is not the body's harmony is not himself in harmony with the truth. 
Bue to return to Augustine. "At"0 chis point a question may 10 arise. Granrcd that the rational soul does not die, is it also impos• sible for it be changed into an inferior cssencd For someone could suppose and not unjustly that it has been proved by this argument that soul cannot be reduced co nothing buc can perhaps be con• verced into body. For if what was previously soul has become body, ic will not entirely cease co exist. But chis cannot happen unless soul itself wishes it or is forced by another. Yee it does not imme• diately follow that a soul, whether it has itself desired it or been subject co compulsion, could be body. For it is a logical necessity chat, if it is body, it either wishes or is compelled ro be body. But it does not follow, if it wishes or is compelled, chat it is body. Bue it will never wish it: for all its desire for body is either co possess it, 
113 
or to give it life, or to fashion it in a way, or to look afrer it in some manner. But none of chis can ensue if it is not itself better than body. But if it is going to be body, it will obviously not be better than body. So it will not wish to be body, nor is there a more con­vincing argument for chis than when the soul asks itself about the issue. For then it easily discovers that it has no desire except for doing something, or knowing, or feeling, or simply living as much as lies within its power. 
"But'11 if it is forced to be body, by what, pray, is it forced? By 11 just anything? Surely by something more powerful. So it cannot be by body. For in no way is any body more powerful than any soul. But a more powerful soul does not compel anything unless it has been subjected to chat soul's power. In no way is one soul sub­ject to another soul's power except by its own desires. So one soul compels but no more than is permitted by the desire of the ocher soul it compels. But we have declared chat a soul cannot have rhe desire to be body. It is also clear chat it cannot reach the fulfill­ment of its desire while it is losing all desire, and it loses desire when it is made body.42 So it cannot be compelled to become body by a soul which docs not have the power of compelling except by way of these subjected desires.4' Next, any soul rhac has another soul in its power necessarily prefers to have it rather than body in its power, and either to look after it with goodness or to rule over ir with evil. So it will not wane it to be body. 
"Finally,H the rational soul char compels is either a living crea-12 ture or it lacks a body. But if it lacks a body, then it is not in this world, and if this is so it is supremely good, nor can it wish on an· other a terrible change for the worse. But if it is a living creature, then the soul coo which it compels is either a living creature or it is not. But if it is not, it cannot be compelled by the ocher. For the soul which is in the highest rank docs not have a more powerful soul than it; in other words, the soul which is free is not com• pellcd. But if it is in a body, then it is again compelled by a soul in a body and by way ofbody to do whatever it is compelled to. But can anybody doubt that it is impossible for such a great change to come about in the soul through the agency ofa body? For it would only happen if the body were more powerful than it. But whatever it is compelled to do through the body, iris nor, strictly speaking, compelled to do ir through the body but through its own desires (concerning which enough has been said). But everybody would agree that what is superior co the rational soul is divine and cer­tainly looks after the soul, and so the soul cannot be compelled by it to be changed into body." 
"If~s then the soul docs nor submit to this through its own will 13 or through the compulsion of another, what docs make it submit? Because sleep often overcomes us against our will, should we be worried that the rational soul is changed into body during this time of weakness, as though indeed, because our limbs go limp in sleep, our soul were to become more feeble in any part? Yet the soul is not perceiving sensibles then, because whatever it is that provokes sleep comes from the body and operates in the body. Sleep lulls the bodily senses, in a way dosing them off, yet in such a manner chat the soul accedes voluntarily to this change of the body. because such a change. which refreshes the body from its la­bors, is narural. Yet sleep does not destroy in rhe soul its power of perceiving and understanding. For soul has images ofsensible ob• jeers at hand with such an expressive likeness that at che rime they cannot be distinguished from the objects of which rhcy arc images. And whatever soul understands is as true for the sleeping soul as for the waking. If, for example, it appears to the soul chat during sleep it has been in a discussion, and in the discussion, having pursued true reasons, it has learned something. then the same unchangeable [truths] remain even when it has woken up and al­though the rest of the context may be found to be unreal: che set­ting of the discussion, che person with whom the discussion ap­peared to have taken place, the words themselves which relate co the dream and which the soul appeared to be using in the discus• sion, and other matters of chis sort which arc perceived by the senses and discussed by people awake. Yet the unreal aspects pass away and do not attain in any way the eternal presence of the true rational principles. We infer from chis char it is not the power of the soul, bur the life of the body which can be diminished by such a change of the body as occurs in sleep." 
"Finally.~6 if, though body is occupying place, soul is not joined 14 to it spatially, then soul is affected by the highest and eternal ratio­nal principles, which immutably remain and arc not spatially con­fined; and it is affected prior to body, and not only prior, but to a much greater degree than body. For the closer it is, the earlier it is affected, and, for the same reason, the better it is than body, the more it is affected. We arc not talking here of closeness in space, but in the order of nature. In that order, it is understood that form is bestowed on body by the highest essence through soul, and body is as big as it is by chis form. So body subsists through soul, and it exists in that by which it is given life, whether uni­versally as the universe, or particularly as an individual creature within the universe." 
"Hence the conclusion [of the earlier discussion] was char soul 15 might become body by means of soul, but otherwise it could nor happen at all. But because it docs not happen -while soul re­mains in that which is soul, body subsists through soul giving it form, not destroying it-soul cannot be changed into body. For were soul not co bequeath the form it assumes from the highest good, body would nor be made through char form; and were it nor to become body through char form, either it would not become at all, or it would assume the form direcdy just as soul docs. Nor would it even become body, because if it assumed the form as directly, it would be the same as soul. Isn't soul better precisely be­cause it assumes a form more directly? But body too would as­sume it as directly if it did not assume it through soul. For if nothing interposed, it would surely 3Ssume it as direccly. •7 And nothing else is found as 3n appropri3te mean between the highest life, which is unchangeable wisdom 3nd truth, and the bsc thing to be given life, namely body, except soul th3t gives life. But if soul bequc3ths form co body so chat it might exist as body to the extent it docs exist, at lease it is nor riling form away in the process of passing it on. Bur in changing soul into body, soul is r:ik.ing form away. So soul docs not become body, which is m3dc through soul, either through itself-since only by soul remaining [soulJ is body made through soul -or through ochers -since body is m3dc through soul only by che passing on of form, and only by chc dc­scruccion of form would soul be changed, if it were changed, into body." 
"Of•~ the irrational soul or life too it can be said that the ratio-16 
nal soul is not changed into it. For unless in its inferior srarus it 
were subject co rational soul, it would rake form in equal measure 
as and be like the rational soul. The stronger rake the form they 
have received from the highest beauty and pass it on to the weaker 
in the natural order. And when they pass it on, they do nor de­
srroy it. \Vhac enables the weaker to exist to the extent chat they 
do is that the form which gives chem existence is passed down by 
f 
the stronger, which, being the stronger, are also the better. This has been granted to chose natures which are not more powerful by being bigger than smaller things, but which, without any enlarge• ment of spacial magnitude, are more powerful because of the same form char makes chem better. Soul is better and more powerful in chis genus rhan body." 
"\\therefore, since body subsists through soul, as has been said, 17 
soul cannot in any way be changed into body. For no body is made 
except by receiving form through soul. But in order to become 
body, soul would have to be in the position not of accepting form 
bur of losing it. And so in no way can it become body." 

BOOK VI 
: I : 
Summary ofopinions on soul under five heads. 
On the first of March and under a laurel,• I had once discussed 1 the foregoing matters at Regnano in the country, ar the house of Giovanni Calvacanci/ our incomparable friend. Three of our dis• ringuished friends, Cristoforo Landino,J Bernardo Nuzzi,4 and Gcorgio Antonio Vespucci, 5 men of probity and exceptional learn• ing, participated in the discussion. 
After listening to these men most attentively, Giovanni s:lid: 2 "Marsilio Ficino, I cannot tell you how much I enjoyed the forego• ing discussion. But, having treated of the general immortality of rational souls, it is also my wish chat you next treat, I beg you, in greater detail and wich specific proofs, of the immortality of our soul. I agree there arc five levels ofbeing as you have established in the preceding discussion and that the third essence which is apart from matter and everlasting occupies the middle of these. More• over, I do not doubt that the celestial souls arc situated on the level of this essence. I also think it probable that our soul is situ• atcd there. However, I do not think it can be completely affirmed before we have taken all the views of the philosophers concerning the soul of man and reduced them co five, and, having confuted four of the views, accepted the last. 
"First alternative: the soul is a very fine miniature body spread 3 throughout our grosser body, whether it be fiery ( the view of Dcmocricus, Lcucippus, and Hipparchus6), or airy (the view of Anaximenes, Diogenes Apolloniates7 and Critias8), or watery (the view of Hippias9), or earthy (the view of Hesiod and Pronop­ides10), or a combinarion of fire and air (the view of Boechus11 and Epicurus), or of water and earth (che view of Xenophan(t]es).12 
"Second alternative: the soul is something better chan body, 4 char is ro say it is not itself strictly speaking the actual bulk of the miniature body, bur some qualiry it possesses which is spread through its parts such as heat or a warm complexion 13 ( chis seems ro be what Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes, Antipater and Posidonius had in mind H). 
"Third alternative: the soul is something purer, like some ; bright point of rhe qualiry in a better part of the quality and min• iature body, a point assigned co the heart say or the brain. Re­siding there it thence governs the other members ( che view of Chrysippus, is Archclaus,16 and Heraclides of Pontus17). 
"Fourth alcern:irive: che soul is something freer still, like a point 6 that is not attached to any part bur cur off from any particular lo­cation; it is present in its entirety in every part of the body, but is such chat it depends on the nature of the body. It depends, I say, in one of two w:iys: either the body's complexion has produced it, or else, though the complexion h:is not produced it, yet the pro­genitor of it, whoever he may be, has led ir forth from the potenti• ality, from the vitals, of matter; drawn ir our in ocher words from some seed, whether an inchoate foundation or proportion of mat• ter itself, into the light of day, and then awarded it completely to matter, to its natural bosom so to speak. Xenophancs of Colo­phon, u Asclepiades, Arisroxenus and Crirolaus19 agree with this view and for them soul is either a swift-moving power of the body or a harmony of bodily pares. 
"Final alternative: man's soul is something divine, chat is, some• 7 thing indivisible, wholly present to every part of the body and pro­duced by an incorporeal creator such chat ic depends only on the power of that agent, not on the inchoate foundation or capacity or kindling of matter. The ancient theologians reach us chis: Zoroas­ter, Mercury, Orpheus, Aglaophemus, Pythagoras, and Plato,20 whose footsteps Aristocle, the natural philosopher, for the most part follows. 
"No other views can be found except these five. But you really 8 will have shown that immortality belongs to us, when, having dis• posed of the first four views, you have given proof of the last. It will be established then that our soul is located in the order of the third essence. This is not only my view. When were dining a few days ago with your friend Bernardo Bembo, 21 a distinguished aris­tocrat and, at that time, an ambassador of the Venetian senate, you remember, I think, that Antonio Chronico of Venice22 and Demetrius of Attica, n a pair of skilled debaters, were of the same opinion; and chat Riccardo Angelleri of Anghiari24 and Oliviero Arduini the Florentine,2s two well known Peripatetics, soon thereafter came to a like conclusion in which [our) three friends, Naldo Naldi, 26 Bartolomeo della Fonte, 27 and Giovanni Battista Boninsegni,28 highly educated men, supported them. You know too that this is the view of Pierleone of Spoleto,29 who has done a brilliant job of combining Platonic with Aristotelian doctrines." 
ITu;, i, wh,c h, sud, ,nd I repli<d ,hu,. 
: I I : 
Those who posit that soul is corporeal are vu{gar philosophers not persuaded by any reason but beguiled by perverse custom. 
To commence at the beginning, I think that those vulgar philoso• 1 phers who, in supposing that the soul is corporeal, have adopted any of the first four views have not been persuaded by some reason but been forced inro this opinion most unfortunately by long us• age and custom. 
The main offices of our soul arc apparcndy three: it aces in chc 2 body, it acts chrough the body, and it acts too through itself. It acts in the body through chat power which the Ariscocelians call the vegetative power, but our Placonists call nature, when it generates and nourishes the body and makes it grow. It aces through the body both by means of external sensation when it secs, hears, smells, castes, and couches, and by means of internal sensation when it takes the images of those bodies it has perceived cxccr• nally, the left-over images so co speak of the senses, and resolves chem in itself. le aces through itself, nor when it makes contact with bodies through the external senses or collects chc images of bodies through the inner sense, but when the soul's pure and in• corporeal power tracks down and discovers an incorporeal some• thing which is neither a body, nor the image of some body-and chis action we call understanding. So you have natural [or vegcta• rive] activity, sensation, and understanding. 
The soul uses natural activity in the foetus dirccdy it has en• 3 cercd the body; it uses sensation a licdc later, dirccdy a child is born; it uses pure understanding, but barely, when the body has already reached maturity. Indeed the majority of human beings al­most never use undemanding, especially chose who arc still chil­dren even at the age ofchirty. Were you co ask chat natural power whac soul is, it would doubclcss reply char it is body, since chat power has no contact with anything else except body. Were you co ask external sensation, it would similarly answer chat it is body: eyes would assign a shape and color co the soul; cars, a voice; smell, an odor; taste, a savor; touch, a weight, solidity, heat, and so on. Bue were you co question inner sensation, which feeds on chc left-overs of the external senses, about the soul. it would depict the soul with the images of bodies; for it docs not have anyching else co bring to bear. Our wretched adolescence, nurtured by these ignorant tutors, compels us co chink about the soul our whole life like fools as long as we believe chc soul is corporeal-we who have 

been schooled by these teachers who perceive corporeal things alone. What particularly seems to give rise co chis error, or per• haps I should say reinforces it, is the fact chat if at some point, having sent these three teachers packing as sophists, we turn in­stead co chc mind, the true teacher of wisdom, and if we ask her what soul is, she will reply chat soul is such as she secs it. Bue how, alas, docs she sec it? How revolting! How miserable! Certainly, it is not as it once was after it had descended from heaven, buc the mind secs chc soul's narural power, che fashioner of the body's four humors in which it is itself immersed, as defiled with pucrcfaccion and smothered under chc greasy far of chc limbs. It secs chc exter­nal senses too rurning aside cowards bodies everywhere, acting through the body, and in a sense being acted upon by bodies. It secs chc inner sense coo, which they call the phancasy, over• whelmed by cite various shapes and qualities of different bodies which have, so co speak, been gulped down through the external senses. So as long as mind secs the soul swathed in its bodily doching and observes its desire drawn down cowards bodies, ic is sure co reply chat the soul is corpord. It is as though a boy were smeared with mud at birch so chat he has gone through boyhood covered over with a layer of mud, and were he subscqucncly asked, "Boy, what is your licclc body made off' wouldn't he answer, "Isn't 
it made of mud?" "Wash your body, child, cleanse your flesh of these clods. You will sec char you arc made of flesh, not mud." 
Dismiss your senses, unhappy men, for they arc ungodly rucors. 4 Ask only your reverent mind, bur be sure you show it chc soul as you first received ir, not when it is enthralled co the body, not when it is soiled with vices' stains. The mind will answer forthwith chat the soul is not just incorporeal but divine. Soul!3° you arc something mighty if you do not fill yourself with the petty; some• thing supremely good if the evil displease you; something beautiful if you shun the ugly; something sempiternal if you scorn the tem­poral. Seeing chat you arc like chis, if you wish to find yourself, seek for yourself, I beseech you, the place where sud, things dwell. But the mighty only dwelt there where place imposes no end as a limit; the best, where nothing unpropitious occurs; the most beau• tiful. where nothing is discordant; the sempiternal, where rhcrc is no defect. So seek yourself there beyond the world. But co seek and find yourself beyond ir, rake wings and Ay beyond it. Nay, re• rum your gaze and look beyond it. For when you yourself embrace the world, you arc beyond it. 

Bue you think you arc at chc lowest point in rhc world, because 5 you arc not looking ar yourself Aying up above the upper air, but gazing upon your shadow, your body, in the depths below. You arc like a child leaning over a well who thinks he is at the bottom of the well as long as he is not turning his gaze upon himself, but looking at his image ac the bottom; or like a bird Aying in rhe air that thinks ir is fiying on the earth when it secs its shadow on the earth. 
Therefore, having abandoned the confines of chis shadow, rum 6 back to yourself. For you will have then returned co breadth. Know chat an immense breadth dwells in the spirit, bur in the body a sort of infinite narrowness. One can sec chis clearly from the fact char numbers -which arc close to rhe spiritual nature in that a) they have no location, b) they measure and number things in terms of form whether they arc incorporeal or corporeal, and c) they arc nothing ocher than replications of the number one (bur one is incorporeal because everything corporeal is multiplc)­numbcrs, I say, which arc spirirual, do increase endlessly bur do not decrease endlessly. Magnitude, to the contrary, has indeed an end of augmentation although it has no end ofdiminution. 
Unhappy men, why do you make so much of the judgment of 7 
the senses when they arc deceived by false images? Doesn't sight 
tell us char the sun, which is far larger than the c:mh, is scarcely 
two cubics wide; char the heavens which arc moving with the 
greatest rapidity arc at rest; chat a straight oar looks broken and 
.• 

bent in water; char the shore is moving when the ship itself is moving:' Doesn't hearing often tell us that a sound is coming from somewhere other than where it is being uttered:' Doesn't taste fre­quently tell us that what is sweet is bitter:' And there are infinite examples of chis kind. Who is it, then, who corrects the errors of che senses:' le is reason. Now what corrects and perfects is more excellent than what is perfected. So reason is more diligent and more truthful than the senses. Reason judges char an incorporeal entity can be found and it concerns itself always with this entity. So it is true in the reason's judgment that somewhere something incorporeal exists, just as it is true in che senses' judgment that many corporeal objects exist in the world. Yet the senses' judgment errs in claiming that there is nothing else except body. Reason's judgment would err coo in chis way if it were co insist perchance that there is nothing corporeal in things. In point of fuct, it is so fur from error chat it even corrects the sense's deceit. 
Indeed, the powers of sensation are so prone to error that not 8 only arc they amended by reason bur they arc censured in turn by themselves. Ifyou trust yourself to sight alone you will say that nothing exists in the world except the things which are visible in light; but sounds, smells, and so on, which are not visible will nor exist at all. Ifyou cruse your cars alone, you will deny chat colors exist; if your smell, you will chink chat only smells exist in the world. And so on with the other senses. Bur just as each of the senses denies chat anything else exists anywhere except whar per· rains to it, and yet we condemn one sense by means of another and discover, and discover correccly, chat something else exists over and beyond what pertains to one particular sense, so all the senses conspiring together deny that anything can exist in nature which is not body. Nevertheless, reason refutes them all, prophe­sying that something incorporeal exists too, and prophesying truly and far more truly than rhc senses which arc condemned in turn by each other and refuted by reason. 

What is more srupid than co grant char we arc superior to the 
9 
beasts in reason, and to concede that what we perceive with our senses (and which some beasts perceive more dearly than we do) in some degree exists, and yet to contend chat what we sec with che eye of reason has no existence? For no animal would be more foolish than man if the power of the rational soul, which is prop· erly man's, were more subject co error than the senses he shares with the beasts. Ir is impious to say that chc king of the animals is the most wicless of chem all. Bur the most witless will be he who will not admit chat the object of chc mind is as much superior to che object of the sense as mind is superior to sense, and therefore char incorporeal natures will acrually be found in a more cxccllenr kind of substance than corporeal substance. This is especially be­cause, if the objects of mind move mind as che objects of sense move sense, then che objects of mind must in themselves possess some substance in order to be able to move mind. Bur if you say chat chc inccllcct is not moved by its objects, then char constitutes sufficient proof already chat at least the inccllccc itself is an incor­poreal narurc, since, when it creates its own edifices, it is not moved by another, and the edifices it builds arc incorporeal. But remember chat, just as a child who is born blind finds it difficult to believe in chc existence of a variety of colors and of light, al­though for other men nothing is clearer than light, so likewise a rational soul surrounded until now by body's darkness can scarcely be brought to accept chat an incorporeal light exists, although to angels nothing within the whole universal order is more manifest. 
Plato laments chis at length in the seventh book of the Rcpub/icH; and Ariscoclc confirms the point in the second book of the Mcta­physics,li when he says chat chc human inccllccc, when confronted with the things which arc in chcmsclvcs most manifest in the whole universal order, blinks like an owl's eye rurncd co the light of the sun. 
137 
= ~ == =.... ... -. 
7_ _11_ 

•.1- 111 


It is time they learned to sec reason, those petty•minded philos• 10 ophcrs, who, relying on the judgment of the senses, cannot think of the soul as being incorporeal and divine. TI1rough daily inter• course with the body, we can sec that they have made themselves so corporeal that, appropriately, they recognize nothing but body or what is born of body. Let chem become pure and they will sec what is pure. Within themselves Ice chem at sometime experi­ence-for they can do this ifonly they wish to -what for so long they have sought in the universe. They certainly sec composite ob­jects, and they perceive numerous forms in the composite objects. Moreover, they long for some forms char exist separately from the composite objects. TI1cy arc themselves composed of soul and body. They possess the life given the body by the soul: and they also possess the soul's own life Aourishing in itself. Let chem scorn the former and look to the latter. Lee them lead the intcllccrual life separate from the body: and once they arc themselves separate they will immediately attain the forms chat arc separate. And straightway they will be able co test in reality Socrates' opinionH a} chat above the forms embedded in formed objects and hence im• perfect arc forms which arc independent and perfect, whence un• formed substrates arc formed; and b) chat there is just one way, not only of reaching, but of possessing incorporeal entities, which is to make oneself incorporeal: to withdraw one's mind co the best ofone's ability from corporeal motion, sense, feeling, and imagina• tion. Experience itself will then reveal firstly what the pure soul is like, namely it is reason living on its own, hovering eagerly around the light of truth: secondly what the angel is like, namely it is pure intellect rejoicing in the light of truth that has suffused it already: and thirdly, when the soul itself, like the angel, comes to rejoice in the full light of truth, it will clearly perceive that God is truth it• self shining and rejoicing in itself, is light itself rejoicing in its own truth, is joy itself shining in its own truth. 
139 
However, we shall begin to recognize somewhat the vulgar 11 error born from habitual intercourse with the body if we at least suppose an education opposite to the body's, such as that Avi­cenna devised in rhc sixth book of his Natural Problems.H Imagine a man instantly created by God, Avicenna says, made fully mature but so disposed that he apprehends nothing through any of his five senses. Now rhc mind of a man in this condition will think about something since he is mature (meaning the body's workshop docs not interfere with understanding) and not consumed by the :tctivitics of the senses ( which impede the opcr:ttion of the mind); and since too there is something there which he can understand. For the soul's substance itself is present to the mind. So with nothing to distract it, the mind will think about the substance of the soul which is present in it. But how will ir chink about the soul~ As being of a particular color, length, or breadth? No! For a blind m:tn docs not perceive these. As melodious or fr:1grant or such like~ Again no! For the mind has not yet received such quali­ties through the senses th:tt it could ascribe a nature having them ro the soul. So that soul will not be able to :tssign itself anything corporeal. So what then will ir assert of itself~ Certainly what is obvious at first sight at least. But th:tt is its essence. So it will affirm th:tt it exists, but it will not sec anything corporeal in itself. So it will affirm that it is completely incorporeal. Nor will it be able even to imagine char it is body, just as the souls of the vulgar, created and brought up in different circumstances as they arc, can­not think of themselves as incorporeal. 
But if someone were to maintain that chis soul docs not affirm 12 it has anything of the existing bodies we receive through the five senses, but is some other body of a different nature, the argument is entirely void. For if even here and now, when we perceive so many different types of body, we cannot even fabricate something new which is not either already present in existing bodies, or at lc:tst can be put together or cxrr:tcred out of them, how could the rational soul in the condition described, being quite unaware of existing bodies, imagine the nature of a new body~ And even if it were possible for the soul to think about some part of its body, in no way would it think it pertained to its own substance. So the ra• tional soul will affirm existence of itself, yet it will deny it is any• thing corporeal. What is affirmed and what is nor affirmed arc cwo quire different things. In this consideration therefore the cs• scncc ofsoul will emerge as something other than body. We think this consideration's judgment is going to be true because it follows the soul's absolutely pure nature and not images received cxtcr• nally. It will thus be a wholly natural judgment and hence com• plcrcly true. If. therefore, the soul were then to wake up and use its senses, as we do now, ir will nor be, as we arc, totally unskilled at seeking out spiritual things. Rather, it will have an easier path by which at some point it can arrive at the consideration of itself and so declare it to be something other than body. This path is wanting to our present miserable souls who first make contact through their nature and their senses with bodies, whether their own or alien ones, before they consider themselves. And this is the source of that miserable error which prevents them from seeing themselves as free from the corruption of body. 

That is as far as I will cake chis account of our upbringing 13 as imagined by Avicenna. Now let me briefly touch on the kind of upbringing our Plato describes in the seventh book of the Re­p11blic.n 
Imagine, he says, a cave beneath the earth. Inside this cave men 14 are brought up from childhood, with necks and hands tied from behind and with feet chained to pillars so that they cannot ever move or sec anything else except what appears on the wall of the cave in from of them. But on raised ground behind them a lamp has been lit, and between rhe lamp and the bound men arc lots of other people walking up and down and talking to each other, and carrying in their hands various effigies of trees and animals. Those 
143 

in chains, therefore, will never truly sec either themselves or any· thing else of the things we have described, but only their own shadows or those of ochers projected before their eyes onto the cave's opposite wall by the fire lie behind them. So they will sup­pose that they arc nothing else but their own shadows, or the other things arc nothing else but their shadows; or they will opine that lighc itself is nothing else but chat dim light which appears rc­Rccrcd there. Bue if one of the prisoners perchance is released and suddenly forced co turn around and look at chc lamp and chc ocher things in front ofit which were behind his back, he will be at once dazzled, and his eyes will hurt, and because of the brightness he will be unable to gaze at the things whose shadows he was looking at moments earlier. And he will suffer even more if he is suddenly dragged up from the cave to the heavenly light ofday. Not all of a sudden, therefore, bur litdc by little and by appropriate stages he should be brought up from chc shadows of things co things them­selves and from the light's reflection co che light itself. So he should gaze at chc things in the cave below with the prisoners first in reAccrion,16 then in themselves. Again he should gaze at what arc outside chc cave with us: first, at night, at chc moon, similarly in reflection, chcn at the things ofearth in chcmsclvcs. Likewise in the heavens, he should similarly gaze up at the celestial bodies which arc only there ac night, but later, by day, he should look at the sun and at what arc visible under the sun, first in reflection, then in themselves, and finally at the sun itself in heaven. By chis means he will be best able to distinguish between individual ob­
jects dearly and easily and will realize what a blind deluded wretch he was when he was bound in the cave and wasting his time on the insubstantial shadows of things. 
Therefore the relationship ofrhac cave co chis world, which we 15 call the visible world, is more or less rhc same as rhc relationship of this world to the world we call invisible and divine, since in chis world wretched souls in a dying body, "in darkness and blind dun­
-. _--r --------= 
_r 


geon pcnt,"l7 never sec themselves or anything else truly or the true sun, but sec rather their own and others' shadows and a pale rcAcction of the true sun. For true minds and individual true ob­jects and the true sun exist only in the invisible world. If we try to look at them too suddenly without the appropriate stages of edu­cation and training, we arc straightway dazzled and our eyes hurt. Bur if we proceed by appropriate stages in our conduct, learning, and riming, then we sec clearly; and we adjudge them poor blind fools who arc deluded, seized, and obsessed by the false shadows and images of this world. But when the rational soul comes down from the measureless light of the invisible world to guide and move this dingy body, it is overwhelmed by the unfamiliar dark­ness so alien to its nature, and compelled for a long time to stagger and stumble abour like a blind man. Furthermore, the sudden ex• trcmc change for the worse induces a prolonged period of sickness and the soul is afflicted rather like those who arc abused and trou­bled by the false images resulting from delirium, sleep, or drunk­enness. Certainly it behaves just like someone suddenly plunged from the sunlight into the cave we have described. For it is wrapped around by the unfamiliar darkness so that it can distin• guish either not at all or just barely in the dim light of the cave the shadows only I have described. And because of this sudden change for the worse it succumbs to various diseases of the senses as well as of the body. This comes from Plato in the seventh book of the 
Republic. 
But let us return at last co chc subject which we settled on at 16 the beginning. Come forth, I beg you, souls of mortals immersed as you arc in bodies. Beyond the limits of the body you will straightway discover your nature, for body has length, breadth, and depth. But since no body is innnitc and its depth accordingly is finite, it terminates in a surface (or plane} without depth. Now you have a surface with length and breadth like body, but lacking depth; and in this one respect it is rising cowards the incorporeal. 


The breadth of a surface is also finite, and it terminates in a long line with ncirhcr depth nor breadth. Now you have a line which is approaching spirit in two respects. Bue the length itself of chc line, because it is finite, terminates in a point which not only lacks breadth and depth bur also length. Now you have a point which is converging on incorporeal nature in three respects. Bur since chis point is the end ofthe line and so has a specific location in body, it docs not fill the whole of it and docs nor give it life. Now, please, separate the point from the line. Conceptually at lease, char which is the end of the line (and exists on its own in some manner prior to ending the line) can be separated from the line. Bur it is permis­sible ro separate what is prior from what is posterior. Now you have a point which is in some manner, conceptually that is, free of the line, and distant from body in the fourth degree. In this free­ing itself it is able co relate equally ro all pares of body, co extend itself through them all, and impart motion. Herc the irrational soul resides. Since rational thought when it is ascending is not de­ceived, and as in thought it found a point free of body, so in reality it will find a point, something in other words that in reality is in­divisible and free of body and that not only fills body and gives it motion, but is itself freely moved and raised to what is above it, to what is now designated unity. Herc the rational soul flourishes, five degrees removed from body's mass. If chc greater an object's needs and the more divisible it is, the more impure it is, then body is more impure than surface. For to exist it needs more dimcn• sions and is divided into more parts. By the same token, surface gives way co line, line to point, and finally, point to unity, which needs neither dimensions nor location. If the most perfect ofthese is substantial unity (and since it is most perfect it is also the most powerful and the most true), and if the others exist and exist as something, then who will deny chat unity truly exists? 
In which case what is there to stop soul from being something, 17 and something indeed with great power even though it may not be great in size? Take the fiery form which is three cubits long in your three cubit long body and collect it all in the center of your heart. The greater the increase in its unity, the greater its strength, like the rays of the sun focused on the central point of a concave bronze mirror which grow so hoc that reflecting back they in­stantly ignite and burn up the toughest materials. Now remove that little portion of heart within which the form of lire is com• pressed and you arc left with a form which is indivisible, active, giving heat and light; and doing so in a different, more remarkable way than it did before. Because it is indivisible and active in its en• tircty, it can light up the whole body equally. Because it burns in a manner beyond belief, it is full of life and life-giving. Because ic shines forth in an astonishing way, it can perceive. It has under­standing too if it reflects upon itself and lifts itself upward. Thus far, by way of objects that can be couched, and moving forward seep by step, you discovered soul when you proceeded from the solid body to something completely independent like a point. 


Now Ice us again examine soul by way of objects chat are seen 18 by the eyes. Tell me, why do you doubt that something spiritual exists in nature, when you can sec spirit in a way even with your own eyes~ You know chat the light of the sun which is visible to the eye is not body, because in a moment it pours over into all, and having poured over it docs not shatter the bodies nor is it tainted itself. What you arc looking at is spirit. Why deny it~ Perhaps you arc going to deny the existence of that which you do not sed In that case you will say that the spheres of air, fire, and the heavens, which arc more outstanding than water and earth, because you cannot see them, do not exist. So the greatest and best part of che world, because it is invisible, will not exist. Bue to return to light. You will claim chat no light exists in che sphere of fire since ir is not visible to the eyes. But the sunlight would still exist even if no one saw it, given that it exists now and is not seen by owls; and it 
151 

• BOOK VI • CHAPTER II · 
is its glow we sec mingled with clouds rather than the sun itself, yet we infer from the glow that somewhere the sun exists. 
In the same way we infer chat spiritual light dwells in the hcav• 19 enly souls from the lighr of the stars which is irs image. Don't you realize char the act oflight is nothing else buc co give light, and the further away it is from gross bodies the brighter ir shines? Scpa• rate it complccdy from marrcr and ic will shine in an even more marvelous way. If ic is ever going co be alive it will then be most alive. The greater its activity, the greater its life, especially since all things live through its hear. It too will perceive, in a manner of speaking, since through its rays all things perceive. Yet it will not itself be perceived, for its tenuity makes it too fine for eyes co see and the profusion of its intellectual light overwhelms the power of earthly vision. You are aware that in rhc spheres of the clcmcncs the lowest fire sinks to the natural level of the highest air, while the highest air rises co rhe level of that fire, so char the fire seems hardly distinct from rhc fine air and the air from the denser lire. Conscqucncly, anyone who ever saw the line air could declare without lying that he had seen the lire. 
The same comparison can be made between the lowest mind 20 which is rational soul and rhe highest body that is heaven. So soul in a way is a rarefied heaven and heaven is a denser soul. He who looks up at heaven secs soul. Think of a geometrical point. Be­cause it has equal regard for any part of the space surrounding it, whenever it is moved through any pare, it is moved in a circle. So what was a point seems co become a circumference, and here a cir• cumfercnce is a point in circular morion chat has run its outer course, but a point is a circumference coiled up on an unmoving base. Again, think ofa spark of invisible light which, because ir ex• isrs above place, spreads equally in any direction and when it is moved in a circle becomes a flaming wheel, and I mean a wheel visible to the eye. The spark is the flame compressed; the flame is the spark expanded. The soul is such a spark, and the aethcrial 
153 

body a flame. And however great the variety of spiritual light in rational souls, the variety of visible lighr in their own and heavenly bodies is just as great. Visible light depends on invisible light just as the pale halo in the clouds depends on the light of the moon. In truth, rational souls differ from each other in this one respect: che souls of the fixed stars and the planets arc encircled by only a transparent body, whereas the rest of the souls by two bodies, a transparent and an opaque one, or at least by one char is very bright and another chat is less bright. Ir seems to be the same quasi light char, as long as it remains a spark, perceives bur is not perceived, bur when it develops into a flame is perceived now but no longer itself perceives. And just as someone who secs a ftamc and denies he secs a spark would lack sense, so he lacks a soul who looks up at the globes of heaven -particular orbits so to speak of souls -and neither realizes that souls arc present like centers in chem, nor admits char the souls arc enfolded spheres of light whereas the spheres arc unfolded souls. That is what Heraclitus meant when he said, "dry light, the wisest soul."18 Thar is why nothing gives the soul more pleasure and wonder rhan light; nor, during its sray on earth, can it live anywhere else than in the light ofspirirual beings. 
Ar this point you have now found chat chc soul is invisible like 21 light, life-giving, sentient, intelligible, intelligent, and a few mo• mcnrs earlier you found chat it was independent of body like a point, active of its own accord, hc:it•giving, life-giving, sentient, capable of attaining things above, what is called a substantial unity. Let this stand as the first foray, a sort of prelude whose purpose is to dispel that wretched l:ick of trust which completely seduces the rational souls of the vulgar from acknowledging the realm of the spirits. 


: III : 
Soul is neither body, nor form divided in body, the proof being its natural power. 
The order of the investigation we have undertaken requires char 1 we demonstrate in the first section ofthe following discussion, and by way of soul's natural power, chiefly that man's soul is nor body and partly coo that it is not form divided in body; that we estab­lish the same argument in the second section, and by way of its sentient power, namely that soul is indivisible form, adding more· over that soul is not attached co any particular part of the body bur extended in its entirety through all the single parts; and char we confirm the same arguments in the third section, and by way of its intelligible power, namely that it is indivisible form everywhere complete, adding moreover chat it docs not owe its origin in any way to matter. For thus man's soul will belong to chc third essence, which is eternal, and be duly judged immortal. 
Let me embark on the first part of the discussion in the follow• 2 ing way, having called upon rhc divine power. 
: IV : 
First procif: that soul is the rational principle ofnourishing and cif all other activity. 
Animals and living planes arc bodies; lumps of wood and stone 1 torn our of rhc earth arc also bodies. The former grow; rhc latter do not. What is the basis of nourishment in the former~ It cannot be corporeal matter, because the other bodies co which the matter is common would be nourished also. Since the power, therefore, chat makes them grow is something other than corporeal matter and is nothing other than the nutritive soul, it follows that such a soul is not body. 


But someone might object, "Nay, it is body, not just any kind of 2 body, but such a body that is properly disposed to the nature of plants and animals, buc not common to scones or dry timber." In which case, let us ask him about chis special sort of body he calls soul, whether it contains in itself two distinct things, corporeal mass and then in addition a certain disposition by which it is called soul and becomes a certain body of ics own; or whether it possesses nothing except the matter everywhere common co all bodies. If the answer is that it has nothing except the common mass, then fruitless is the objection which declared that soul was not just any body, but of a particular kind disposed in a particular way. For it would not become a particular kind disposed in a par• ticular way except through quality itself and a specific disposition added to the body by way of which it is not only body but body of a particular kind, and differs too from any other body. If nothing else is rhere, accordingly, except chc single mass common to all bodies, and since it is present in dry timber and rocks, these coo will possess soul through which they are nourished. But because chis is agreed to be false, the body our opponent called soul must necessarily contain not only body's matter but also some quality or form. It is not called soul because of the matter itself of body, since matter belongs to all bodies, even those lacking life. So it must be called soul because of a form, a life-giving form. For chis is the property of soul. That life-giving form we shall call soul, but the matter co which soul isjoined, because it shares in life through soul, we shall not call soul, or part of soul, but rather an entity possessing soul. 
The present argument is strongly supported by the view intro• 3 duced at the onset, when we established chat body is incapable of acting on its own, since we sec chat direccly soul arrives in bodies 
159 
... -... 
~ 
_r---1_ _n 


 r -.&..rr 


many activities thence proceed which do not occur before the soul's arrival or afrer irs departure. Therefore we conclude that the soul which is the source ofsuch activities is not body. 
: V : 
Second proof: that soul is not animate or inanimate body. 
What sore of body do you want soul co be? Ensoulcd or soulless, 1 animate or inanimate body? You cannot call something chat gives animate life to others soulless. For how can soul, if it is soulless body, give life co body? Nor can you call soul cnsouled body, for, if soul is called ensouled body, then the body subscquencly said co be ensouled is called cnsouled through some soul. I repeat che ques• tion about that soul. Is it body or not? If body, is ic animate or in• animate? If the reply is inanimate, we have an absurdity. If ani• mace, chen again I ask the question about chat soul through which body is said ro be ensoulcd. And as long as you assert that soul is body, you will be forced to go on forever, and forever you will be obliged co reply with an absurdity. For both answers -that the soul is ensouled and chat the soul is soulless -seem co be those of a madman. It is like affirming of wisdom chat ic is boch wise and unwise, or of light char it is both lie up and dark. For just as light is neither dark in char it lights others, nor lie up by another in that it is the prime light, so soul is neither soulless because it gives life, nor ensouled by something else, being properly that by which any· thing is truly animated. And if you refer the soul to something else by which ic is animated, then I will similarly refer chat some· 
thing again to something else, and chat again to something else. 
And I shall never stop, or if I do I shall certainly find rest only ifI 

s:iy th:ir wh:it we posited first, or something subsequent to it, is not :inim:ited or given life by something else, but is itself properly speaking wh:it :inirnares and of itself gives life to another. Such an entity :ind no other I shall properly call soul and life. 
To :ivoid rh:ir ad infinitum argument and the :inswers of a rn:id-2 man and yet to maintain rh:it soul is body, maybe you will proffer the argument that soul is body, not indeedjust animated body but :inim:ite body, not just body given life but living body. Ifso, you will revert to the same dilemma. For my question will be: Is it soul for the same reason it is body or for another reason, a new and ad· ditional reason by virtue of which it is called anirn:ire and living body! Obviously it is not for the reason it is body, since all bodies would be souls and display che activities of life. It follows that some other nature over and beyond the body's rational principle is present there by virtue of which chat body can be called animate and living. I am going to designate that nature properly life and soul. 
: VI : 
Third proof: soul is neither dense nor rarefied body. 
Is soul a dense body like water, earth, and suchlike, or rare and 1 subtle like fire or air? One can hardly maintain che first, because it is the ducy of soul to penetrate bodies, fill chem, and set them in motion, all with the utmost case. Dense bodies arc absolutely unfitted for this operation. Perhaps the second hypothesis seems more likely: that soul is a rarefied body like fire or air. But if it is said to be lire, is lire soul for the reason it is lire or for some other reason? Ifit is called soul for the reason it is fire, then obviously any fire will be soul and all things on fire will be alive. So it must be for some other reason. One should ask the same question about air and conclude we must always look for soul beyond the nature of body. Nor should someone posit over and beyond the four clements any fifth superlatively rare mini-body that, having permeated the denser bodies, serves as their soul. For the same question will recur: Is the mini-body soul through its matter or through some power added co the matter? If we grant the first, then all bodies will be souls because matter underlies them all; if the second, then we will now have che answer we want: char soul must always be referred co some power which is in a way incor· porcal. 
Herc some commentators offer chc following brief supporting 2 arguments. Ifthe soul is said co be divisible, do its parts live as the whole docs, or not? If they do, chcn the whole soul exists in its in· dividual parts, and hence docs not need quantity since it is not di­minished through division. Ifthe parts do not live, life consists of things that arc not alive; and that is impossible. 
Again, all body can become known to any of the five senses; but 3 
the soul to none. All body is circumscribed by some shape or 
limit; soul is not. All body of necessity performs its activity over 
the course of time -being divisible in essence, it is even more so in 
action. Soul often acts in an instant. Body occupies place by way 
of quantity rather than by way ofessence, because it fills place up 
with its size. Soul is present in body by way ofessence. For as it is 
present to body, ic gives existence to it. Existence is given through 
essence, just as being wise comes through wisdom; therefore soul 
is present through essence. Body is so located in another rhac it is 
contained by, and exceeded by, rhac in which it is placed. Soul is in 
body: not contained by, but rather containing it. For soul perfects, 
contains, and guides body. Soul finally is superior co any and all 
body; therefore it is superior to the lines and points which are in 
bodies as in a subject. TI1e indivisible is more excellent than che 
divisible; therefore rational soul must be more indivisible than a 
line or a point. 
: VII : 
Fourth proof: body is composed ofmatter and form. 
A natural body is composed of matter and form. A living creature is a natural body. So matter is in it and form. But it consists of soul and body. Now body is not natural form, because natural form is the form ofsomething and it is in something as in a partic­ular formed substrate. Bur body is not rhe form ofanything, nor is it in something as in a substrate but rather in space. The remain• ing possibility is that soul is form, especially in view of the fact chat ir is the proper internal principle ofactivities and movements, nay, for a living creature ir is the principle of being. All this per· rains co form. So soul is form.19 But if soul were body too, rhen for both soul and body we would still need some other form through which rhey could together be called a single living crea• ture, and that other form we would more properly call soul. For through soul, as through form, body which was beforehand poten• tially alive becomes actually alive, actually a living being. So only soul is form,o especially because if soul had two parts, matter and form, three absurd consequences would result. First, it would nor inform body according to its whole self, because it would not form body through rhe part ofitself which is matter; but an appropriate form must perfect all its own matter according to its whole es· sence. Second, the part of soul which is called form would be the perfection of two matters having the same rational principle; but narure does not permit this, just as it docs not permit two forms having the same rational principle to inform the same matter. Third, soul would be changed into these inferior bodies and vice versa, if it possessed a common matter with them. But this is un­thinkable, because if a mutual change-over of bodies and souls were to occur, a fortiori a transformation of any souls into any 
other souls would occur, and again of any bodies into any other bodies. 
Let us accept then that soul is form alone; and I do not mean by this accidental but subsr:mtial form. Since the soul is the ruler and mover of body such that it contains, srops, and turns it, it is superior to body. Body is substance. Bur no accident is more excel­lent than subsr:mce. On rhc other hand, the mover, insofar as it is che source of motion, docs nor depend for its existence on what is moved. So the soul which in trurh is the body's mover does not depend on the body, as if it were the body's lackey. So it is not an accident of the body. Moreover, whatever sustains opposites one after rhc other while itself remaining the same is a substance. Soul, while remaining rhc same receives now one opinion, now an­other, opinions which arc mutually opposed, now knowledge, now ignorance and conflicting emotions. So soul is a substance, and by substance I mean a substantial form. Bur form is not body, be­cause all body is defined by some form and form qua form cannot be formed. Hence it follows that soul is not body. For the rime be­ing I shall overlook rhose arguments which prove chat our soul 
cannot be an accident, because, if it were embedded in a substrate by some necessity, it could not oppose it, nor ever cum back on it­self, nor rise above the genus of accidents to the genus of sub• stance, nor define this genus properly, nor be able to distinguish it from accidents, nor measure correctly by how great an interval substance excels accidents. 
: VIII : 
Fifth proof body by its nature is dispersed.41 
Body by its nature is completely dispersed [for three reasons]. 1 Firstly, it endures distance between its parts, such that one part is always in one place, another in another. Secondly, it is continually changing. For if it is subject to time, then just as various moments succeed each other in rime, so do the feelings in the body vary at various moments. This variation, since it occurs in the heavens, will occur even more in the clements which arc in the grip of the heavens. Thirdly, it is subject to opposing qualities (heat and cold and so on). Hence it is contrary to the nature of body to come to• gerher into a single whole, to remain the same, and to be stable in itself. For quantitative extension in itself compels the parts of the body to remain separated. Continuous motion forces its nature to change, never to have all its possessions at the same time, but to lose one and seek another. The opposition of qualities forces one to flee another, and because ofchis flight che compounded body it• self falls apart. 
Bur although it is evident from all this that the body in its own 2 nature is incapable consistently of staying together in unity, yet it is true that any body in some way is linked in its parts, which all unite together to form the bond of the whole body. Therefore there must be something in the body beyond the body's nature which unites it, arrests it, and contains it: unites the separated parts, arrests the unending flux, mutually contains by its own sim• ple harmony rhe body's discordant qualities. 
What can this something be? Is it body? If it is body, it like-3 wise requires another to bind it together. What is this other? A body? If a body, then it too requires another. This is the reason we have to admit that there can be no unity in bodies, no stability or harmony unless some incorporeal power is present in chem. So, if we say soul too is body, it also needs something to bind it together. Bue our contention is that soul ( or a power of soul) is this binding power rather than chat which is bound, since we sec chat ic is a property of soul to bind together conflicting humors and diverse pares into the unitary structure of the living organism, and chat they all ebb away when the soul departs. Thus soul is not body, but the body's inner bond or binding substance. 
Nor is it form divided up through the body. For such a form, 4 according to the Platonists, loses in body its natural simplicity and stability, and so, like body, requires something else co hold it to­gether, something chat remains one in itself and is not scattered along with the division of the body. 
But should someone inquire whence stones and timber arc al-5 locccd chc unity of their parts, the Placonists will respond chat, as long as they arc attached to the earth, chey derive both unity and growth from the earth's soul. Once they have been uprooted, how­ever, they no longer grow, but they do retain their unity, 
: IX : 
Sixth proof two bodies do not occupy the same place. 
Two bodies cannot both occupy exactly the same place ac the same 1 
time. For if chey had co be in exactly the same place, they would first have co be divided into pares and then their parts in turn joined to parts. Now if che parts arc indivisible, then che two bod­ies have already been reduced co their indivisible components; and, being compounded from the same materials into which chey arc broken down, it follows chat corporeal magnitude has congealed out of indivisible entities. Bue this is impossible, because the ag­gregation of indivisible cncicics never produces a magnitude. Con­trariwisc, if the parts arc divisible, then each of chem in itself will be a body and have its own location separate from another part. So two bodies will not be in one place, but many little bodies in many little places. If then cwo bodies cannot occupy exactly the same place, soul which everywhere diffuses itself through a living body, and extends itself through all a body's points, is not body. 
That the soul is present throughout rhe body is immediately evident from rhc fact chat nothing is more intrinsic to essence than being, and so rhe form by which substantial being is given both co the whole body and to its parts is deep within the whole and its parts. Because a thing's relationship ro unity is the same as its rela­tionship to being, soul, which on its own gives being, on its own is united to the entire body, without the help of an intermediary. Thar it docs in fact give substantial being is dear from the face that, once the soul is removed, all the parts of rhc body change shape. But since being flows from essence and activity from power, soul, which gives being and acriviry ro the individual parts, also imparts its essence and power ro those parrs.~2 For it confers being and acriviry insofar as it is united wirh chem. So if it confers them on the individual pans, it is united too with the individual pans. If any inanimate natural body is one single thing because of a sin­gle form existing in the whole and its parts, isn't it more true that an animate body will be one because of rhc presence of soul in its whole and its pares? Bur if soul were only in one part, it would be 
the form of char part alone, and rhc other parts would have other 
forms. So ir would not be a rruly single natural body that is crc• 
aced from all the parts, but an aggregation, like a house made up 
of walls. No harmony or mutual accord such as now exists would 
exist among any of the animate body's parts, unless the different 
parts were cemented together by a single soul, just as all the joints 
arc nor subjected together to rhc pull of a sinew unless that same 
sinew is present in them all. 

Additionally, life is present in every licrlc portion of the body, 
3 however small, and movement and sense arc in most of chem. TI1csc arc the inner powers and activities of the soul. The power and activity internal to an agent do not exist without rhc agent's substance. So soul is present in chem if it exerts its power and is active in chem. When ir is moved in irs own way, it docs not break up the body, because no pain is caused by the movement of soul through rhc body. But continuous pain would occur in the body if its parts were broken up and thrown into disarray because of the soul's movement. And they certainly would be broken up if soul were body, since it is moving through the body with its own per­petual movement. So how can soul be body, when it is present rhroughour chc body and everywhere fills and penetrates it totally without causing it any harm~ If it were a solid body, either it would nor fill the whole body, and so the whole would nor be alive, or if it did fill it, then in the act of penetration it would smash it or be smashed itself, and produce in us continuous pain. But if rhc body were fluid or liquid, rhc soul would neither bind fast the body of a living thing nor give it stability, bur it would it­self require some ocher bond as I said above by whose stability ir might be strengthened, governed, moved. Bue ir is that other bond we would more willingly call soul. or rather, the soul's power, since the soul's power in a body is almost the same as the power ofa co• agulant in milk to curdle the milk, or of the power of a magnet over iron ro attract or suspend it, or the fine-tuning in a clock which regulates it, sets it going, and makes it chime in such a wonderfully orderly way. But the soul itself is not a power or a tuning or tempering of chc humors, but rather a substantial form, simple, and indivisible, which through its power and natural arr tempers the body's spirits, humors, and limbs. 


: X : 
Seventh proof: body is not simultaneously and wholly in many places. 
Neither bodies nor forms divided in bodies can ever be in a num• 1 ber of parts or locations at rhc same time. The power ofa seed is present in its entirety in every pare of the seed. For the number of births corresponds to the number of parts the seed is divided into (this is especially obvious in the case of fish eggs). If a whole ani­mal spawns from each little drop of seed, then the whole power of rhc seed is hidden away there. This power is the soul's instrument for procreation. It follows then afortiori that the whole soul must be present in every little particle of seed and body. Inasmuch as the whole power of soul is present in the individual parts, isn't the whole vegetative power present in any seed of a plant, since it can produce a complete plant from any seed~ The vegetative soul too is originally taken in by a tiny little root or seed, and then, as the tree grows, spread through all the branches. \Vhen the branches fi. nally decay or arc cut off, it shrinks back again into the root. Plorinus and Porphyry think char this soul, which equally is en­closed in the least parts and fills up the greatest, lacks quantity.43 
: XI : 
Eighth proof: soul is life or the fountain of life. 
We believe chat soul is a certain nature which either is a life or 1 possesses life as its companion and faithful attendant, inasmuch as bodies acquire life through soul. Body of necessity is divided into many parts. For one body is compounded from several elements; another is an clement not compounded from ocher clements, but consriruted from form and matter. Ifyou said that soul was a body 


made from several clements, let us ask whether all those elements possess life of themselves separately from the ochers; or whether none docs but assembled together they do produce life; or whether just one of chem possesses life. Ifany clement possesses life on its own, there arc as many souls as clements; and you will not have a single soul chrown there together from many parts, but many different souls occupying the same abode. Ifnone of the elements possesses life, they will never create it by crowding rogccher. But if life is born in chis crowd of theirs, it will not be through their power char this life is born, since they lack life, but rather through the power of whatever brings order co the crowd. l11is is especially since we have to acknowledge chat, even iflife were ignited by the crowding together of many things, noncchclcss life is not produced in chem if they assemble haphazardly but only if chcy assemble in a definite rational order and way. Thus chc orderer from within of this planned assembly will be soul itself, in its own way furnishing life ro the clements as they flow together. But if you said that any one of the many clements has life, then that alone will be soul; and co produce soul, you will need none of the other clements except chis one. So there is no way we can accept that soul is body made up of several clements. However it is not a single clcmenr eichcr, because any clement consists ofmatter and form. Ifthe clement is to be alive, it could not be alive through its matter, since formless matter cannot give life either to anything else or to itself. So such would be alive through its form. So the form would be soul. 
Furthermore, if the soul were a body, whether an clement or 2 something similar, simple or compound, then ic would certainly, if I may use the term, or similarly be affected, chat is, be hot or cold, dry or wet, light or heavy, rare or dense, fluid, solid, white, black, and so on. If hot, it would only make things hot; if light, it would fly upward; and generally speaking, whatever sort of body it were, ic would act in accordance with its particular nature and never produce an effect in conflict with its own nature. For cold docs not make things hot. Bur che nature and form of every body is specific and determined, just as its place is determined, its time fixed, and its power finite. Thus the activiry of any body is determined and docs not extend to contrary effects. 


Soul, however, seems co have power to do various contrary 3 things. For it produces in animals' different bodies and in the same body many mutually conflicting resulcs. It can hair, sec in morion, contract, expand, rarefy, condense, sharpen, make blunt, open, shut, liquify, and solidify. It gives contrary smells, tastes, and col­ors, and opposite powers and shapes to the body's humors and parts; ic drags light spirits down co the feet and lifts heavy humors up to the head. And all chis happens contrary to che nature of bodies. Ir makes che body move in every direction: upwards in spite of the weight of the heavy clements, downwards in spite of chc buoyancy of the light, sideways and in a circle in spire of body's every natural power.44 Since ic can produce practically all mutually contradictory effects and is so much in control of con­flicting movements that it can move bodies in ways contrary to che laws governing them, who would be so foolish as to claim chat soul is either body or a qualiry of body or some aspect of quality? 
: XII : 
Ninth proof: body is not self-moving. 
What is truly and primarily self-moving in that it is entirely the 1 same and both the source and che recipient of motion muse be self-moving wholly in respect of itself, just as it is clearly the case with anything else described as possessing in itself and primarily some one or ocher qualities. For insr:mcc, what is rhus brilliant is wholly brilliant in respect of itself; what is thus good is wholly good; what is rims intellect is wholly intellectual. For an essence which pours out some quality and primarily so and primarily cm• braces and receives it, in that it docs both perfectly, docs both through the whole of itself. Bur somewhere in nature an essence must be found which is mobile ofor &om itself; and soul must be such, as I have proved in earlier books. 

But body, even if we were to suppose char it is self-moving and primarily so, would nor yet be such wholly in respect of itself, be­cause each of its pares and the parts of che parts and rhc particles would have to be moved. For if there were one little segment in the body which was nor self-moving, then rhe body would nor be self-moving wholly in respect of itself and thus would nor be truly and primarily such, bur only through the participation and pres• cncc of some other thing which was primarily such. So for the body to be perfectly self-moving, one would have to concede that all its little parrs were self-moving. Bur they arc infinitely divisible, so the number of little parts which were self-moving would be infinite. What moves acts; what acts exists in act. So infinite self­moving parts would be in act, and there would be infinite movers in every body in the world. Or rather, they would not be the parts of another body because they existed in their own act; but any part would exist wholly on its own, and there would be an infinite multitude of tiny bodies existing in act. But such a multitude can­not exist in nature. Since the parts of the body cannot be infinite in act, therefore, or rather since they do not really even exist in act at all (given that they possess no being of their own but arc in­cluded in the being itself of the whole compound body), it follows that the parts ofbody arc not self-moving lest they be required be­cause of this to exist in act and to be absolutely infinite in acc. Our conclusion then is char body cannot be truly and primarily self. moving, because this characteristic cannot belong to body wholly in respect of itself, given chat its pares arc incapable of achieving the goal of self-movement. 

Let us approach the same point again by a different path. 3 When someone claims char body is self-moving, he is for the most part obliged to accept one of the following four hypotheses: either one parr of chc body is moved by another, or the whole by a part, or a pare by the whole, or the whole by chc whole (all the parts, in other words, arc moved by all the pares). If you assert the first, since one part is one thing, another part another, the same thing will not move itself but one thing will move another. Hence the compound body will not really be self-moving, since it consists of some parts which arc not self-moving; but it will possess in itself two mutually distinct cnrirics, one of which moves the other. If you accept the second of che four hypotheses, chat a pare moves the whole, or the third, rhac the whole moves a pare, the com• pound is not yet really moving itself. For we arc supposing that the part and the whole arc different things. And chc part chat moves the whole obviously moves all the pares, and chus in the number of che various pares it moves itself too. Similarly, if the whole is said to move the part, it moves that one part by way of all the other pares. So it only moves just one part and in a way through itself. In these two of the four hypotheses you sec chat the whole cannot be said co be self-moving in any ocher way than thanks co the agency of that pare of itself which is self-moving, and nor through the other parts. So it will not truly be the whole that is sclf-mov• ing, bur perchance chat part of rhc whole which will not even be a part of the whole because it will be doing something on its own. But if you accept the fourth hypothesis, char the whole is moved by the whole, since the whole perchance is nothing other than all the parts taken together, you will be saying chat all the parts arc moved by all the parts. At chis point one is obliged to state that the compound is self-moving only because every part of it is self­
--~.•~-. ' ­

a.r.• 1.-, T rT 

moving. So you will continually have to resort to a part if you are going to maintain that body is self-moving. 
We reject chis in the first place because it will not strictly be the 4 compound body char is self-moving seeing that it is being moved by another, namely by the parts, for it is called self-moving by rea• son of the pares. For although we would agree char the body is in a sense the sum of its pares, yet it seems to borrow this self-motion from the individual parts, just as it accepts its substance from them. Answer me, I beg you, one question about rhe part or parts by reason of which the whole is said to be self-moving. Are they indivisible in that they move themselves:' If they are, what moves itself is not body, but some indivisible thing in body by whose im• pulse even body seems to be borne along spontaneously. Ifthey are divisible, then we will split them up in the same way we have al­ready divided the whole body, and by the same argument we will discover chat in no way can it be affirmed ofthe parts that they are self-moving except by reason of the particles which are self-mov­ing. And we shall similarly examine these particles. As they are infinitely divisible, we will discover new and ever more movers. Nor will we ever arrive at one mover, since we can always produce more by division, and we will never reach the first movers or mover, since similarly we can keep dividing to infinity. Nowhere, then, in the body's substance is there a single prime mover of it. In which case, it has no source for its motion within itself which would allow us to claim in truth that it moved itself. But we are compelled to resort to some indivisible entity from which all bodily motion derives its origin. 
But body's internal mover is soul. When it is present, bodies 5 are borne in every direction as though of their own accord; bur when it is absent, they need an outside agent to move them. If soul is body too, then it too needs a mover -I mean an internal one, since all living things move themselves without external im­pulse. Thar internal mover will be the soul, which must be self­moving, because it is through soul char bodies appear to have the power of moving themselves. But all such must be reducible to some nature which is genuinely self-moving. So soul properly is self-moving, if other things acquire the power to be in a certain sense self-moving by the participation of soul. Therefore soul is not body. But neither is it form dispersed through body. For as previous arguments have demonstrated, form too is incapable of moving itself, being subject to the same conditions as body. 
That disposes of the specious claim of chose who attempt co 6 show that body is self-moving by declaring that body is so com­pounded from form and matter or from the four clements char, besides matter and form and the four clements, some other nature emerges which is the uniry of the whole [and] which moves itself, since via form it has the power co move, and via matter co be moved. Such an objection cannot prevail against the Platonists, in the first place, because the origin ofits moving will appear to lie in one essence and the origin of its being moved in another. Bur one has to arrive at some essence which is source and receptacle alike of motion and of life, just as one arrives at some essence which is light's origin and ground simulraneously, and at another essence which is heat's. The objection cannot prevail in the second place, because, if that nature which is the integrity of the whole is quan­titatively extended, it will be no more self-moving than the body's bulk, as we demonstrated above. But if it is indivisible, then we have already arrived as we wished at an incorporeal nature wherein exists rhe power of moving itself, and not because it acts on itself and is acted upon. For motion in it docs not signify a passage from agent to patient, but a natural alternation of its essence by means of which it varies chc succession of its affective dispositions and goes to and fro of itself'~ without anything else moving it, just as fire is hot by itself without anything else heating it or one of its parts radiating hear co another. 

