Were the soul not immortal, no creature would be more miserable than man. Since man's mind is never at rest, his body is frail and he is totally  without resources, the life he leads on earth is harsher than that of the beasts. Had nature set exactly the same term to his life as she has to the other creatures, no animal would be more miserable than man. But man by his worship of God comes closer to God than all other mortal things, and God is the author of happiness. So it is utterly impossible that man should be the most unhappy of all. However, only after the death of the body can man become any happier. It seems therefore to follow of necessity that once our souls leave chis prison, some other light awaits them.  Our human minds, "immured in darkness and a sightless dungeon,''  may look in vain for that light, and we are often driven to doubt our own divine provenance. But I pray that as heavenly souls longing with desire for our heavenly home we may cast off the bonds of our terrestrial chains; cast them off as swiftly as possible, so that, uplifted on Platonic wings and with God as our guide, we may By unhindered to our ethereal abode, where we will straightway look with joy on the excellence of our own human nature. In order to show clearly how best the minds of men can unlock the bars of mortality, witness their own immortality and thus achieve a state of blessedness, I shall try, as best I can, to prove in the following discussion: [first,] that besides this inert mass of our bodies, to which the Democriteans, Cyrenaics and Epicureans limit their consideration,  there exists an active quality or power, to which the Stoics and Cynics direct their investigation; and [second] that beyond quality, which is divisible along with matter's dimensions and subject to all manner of change, there exists a higher sort of form, which, though it is in a certain sense changeable, admits of no division in a body. In this form the ancient theologians located the seat of the rational soul. This was the point {in the argument] reached by Heraclitus, Marcus Varro and Marcus Manilius.' I shall also attempt to show that beyond rational soul exists angelic mind, which is not only indivisible but unchangeable as well. This is the point where Anaxagoras and Hermotimus rested content.' But the eye of angelic mind, which seeks for and finds the light of truth, is ruled by the divine Sun itself. It is towards this that Plato urges, instructs and enjoins us to direct the gaze of the mind, once it has been purified.  Once we have ascended so far, we shall compare in turn these five levels of being: body (bodily mass), quality, soul. angel and God. Because the genus of rational soul, which occupies the midpoint of these five levels, appears to be the link that holds all nature together-it controls qualities and bodies while it joins itself with angel and with God-I shall demonstrate: [first,] that it is in fact completely indissoluble, because it holds together the different levels of nature; next, that it is preeminent, because it presides over the framework of the world; and finally, that it is most blessed when it steals into the bosom of the divine. I shall seek to establish that the condition and nature of soul is such as I have described, firstly by general arguments, secondly by specific proofs, thirdly by signs, and lastly by resolving questions. Body does not act of its own nature. According to Plato, body is made up of matter and of quantity. It is characteristic of matter only to be extended in space and affected. by action; and extension and being affected are passive conditions. But quantity is nothing but the extension of matter; or, if it is anything else, it is such that it is always subject to division even as it subjects matter to an unending sequence of experi-ences and has no affect on any other matter than its own. It follows from all this chat body in itself does not act but solely is acted upon. The same point becomes clear from the following argument. For each natural action to be accomplished, three requirements must be met: first, the agent must be most powerful in itself; second, it must be most ready for motion; and third, it must easily penetrate the object being acted. upon, so that the object is immediately united. with the agent. The mass of the body seems to be a hindrance to all of these conditions. In the first place, because of the extension of the body in many parts, the acting force in it is dispersed and distant &om itself and broken up to the utmost degree. Power increases with union, but diminishes with dispersion. Dryness, for instance, increases the intensity both of heat and of cold by uniting it; dampness weakens it by dispersing it. Secondly, the larger a body is, the more sluggish it is; by its very nature it is unsuited for motion. So the bigger a body grows, the slower it is to move, and the longer the action is delayed. The power of lightness, for instance, makes a spark fly up more rapidly than a Aame; the power of heaviness makes a log fall more rapidly if it is pointed than if it is wide. Thirdly, since any body fills its own space and one space cannot accommodate two bodies, bodies cannot coalesce in one space: their solidity and density prevent them fi-om penetrating one another. To sum up, the space between parts weakens the power to act, the bulk of bodily mass retards motion, and density impedes bodies' penetration. What is worse, if nature forces the scattered parts of a body together in order to increase its power by union, the body becomes denser meanwhile and less suitable for penetration. H nature makes it less dense in order to facilitate motion and penetration, the power of acting is dispersed forthwith. And so, since these three conditions are required for accomplishing action, body either possesses three other conditions hostile to these three, or it accepts one of them but not another. What body would need is smallness, lightness, and lack of density all at the same time; but these would take it back to being a certain incorporeal habit.  So all power of acting must be attributed to an incorporeal nature. Isn't it from quantity that we have a multitude of parts in the agent, in the patient, and in the space between them? Because of the first, an action which would otherwise have been very vigorous is very sluggish; because of the second, what would have been completed instantaneously is gradually accomplished; because of the third, what would have been done rapidly takes a long time to finish. So vigorous, rapid and instantaneous action seems to belong to some sort of incorporeal force. Take fire, for instance. Because of its rarity it comes closer to the nature of spirit than the other elements. Of all the elements it is the most effective agent, however. In scarcely a moment it can perform what it takes other bodies a long time to do. It does not admit of any blending with other elements, as is the case with other bodies. With a single spark, if there is fuel enough, it will fill almost the whole world. The other elements do not extend themselves out so far, so quickly or so vigorously. It is because fire is so fine and subtle that it becomes powerful. Because it becomes powerful, it extends outwards, not the other way around. It is capable too of giving light, which is regarded as incorporeal, and the action of light is instantaneous. Another example: a little air at the top of a barrel keeps the barrel floating on the water's surface, even if it is loaded down with the weight of many stones. Lightning and cannon-fire too demonstrate quite clearly the power of air and fire. As a final argument one can note that the heavens, which arc the least dense of all, are the most remarkable for their light, motion and power to act. If a body becomes a more effective agent the closer it is to the incorporeal, is it not obvious that the power of acting resides in an incorporeal nature? We can grasp the same point in the following way. What is first  in nature, that is, God, acts on everything but is never acted upon. So what is last, that is, corporeal matter (or body], has to be acted upon by everything. It can never act on anything else of itself, for nothing exists below it which could be the subject of its action. And if in the highest unity, being infinite, there exists an infinite power of acting, then in infinite plurality there exists no power of acting at all but rather an infinite capacity for being acted upon. The Pythagoreans think that body is infinite plurality, because it is endlessly divisible. So if bodies appear to act in any way, they do not do so by virtue of their own mass, as the Democritcans, Cyrenaics and Epicureans supposed, but through some force and quality implanted in them. This is hardly surprising. For action arises in natural bodies when opposition arises between contraries. Such opposition is born in the genus of qualities.Furthermore, the same matter and the same indefinite spatial  extension underlie all bodies. So if action proceeded from matter or extension, all would act in the same way. As it is, since the acrions of different bodies are obviously different, they do not act through a single matter and extension, but through their own distinctive forms and qualities. By virtue of what they are, properly speaking, they also act. But they are in this or that species, not because of their mass, but because of a particular form. So it is through form chat they acc. This is for (three] particular reasons. To begin with, an agent first approaches the object to be acted upon by way of form's qualities before doing so through the limits of quantity. Next, it is through the power of form, not through quantitative extension, chat it can pass into alien matter. And finally, it reaches each individual point of chat matter not through extension but through quality. It is by coldness that water gets cold. It is by heat, not mass, chat fire gets hot. Fires do not burn because they extend far, but because they are extremely hot. In-deed, if all its heat were concentrated into a single point, its power co burn would become most intense, because of the high degree of unification. Thus action arises thanks to quality, especially when quality is concentrated. That is why natural causes produce effects like themselves in  quality rather than equal to chem in quantity. If occasionally the effects do rumour to be equal in size, they have to have first ap-peared very similar in appearance {an action accomplished as it were by qualities). Afterwards, necessarily, in and through their qualities, the effects resemble their causes. Thus almost all children resemble their parents in complexion and features when they are newborn, but equal them in size only occasionally and much later. The point is obvious to anyone. You do not become big by approaching a big body; but you certainly get hot if you approach something hot. Nor do you perceive quantity with any of your senses unless one sense has first been affected by quality. For who can judge the size of a wall unless color and light have brought its bigness before the eye. Further, the judging of quantity is lost with distance more and earlier than the judging of light or color. It is as though motion's efficacy consists in quality. The point is dearly demonstrated by the fact that our desire is  aroused by something because it is good, not because it is large or multiple; and goodness is a quality. Otherwise we would always choose what is larger or more numerous. In fact, with chose things we deem evils, we choose the smaller or the fewer. Quality cannot be body, however, because two bodies cannot be brought together in the same space without mutual repulsion, whereas several qualities can be blended together in the same object. The matter of honey, for instance, always possesses a combination of three qualities, yellowness, sweetness and fragrance. Every drop of honey is yellow. sweet and fragrant in the nostrils. Again, every body by its very nature is extended in length, breadth and depth. But quality by its very nature appears to be unextended, otherwise no quality would not be extended somewhere. Yet some qualities that are unextended are present in the point, in unity, in number, in harmony, in powers. So quality is not body. Indeed, if extension were natural to it, the bigger it became, the stronger it would be; but being dispersed in extension makes it weaker. So quality, indivisible itself in a way, suffers division in the ex- tension of body. Division of course happens only by reason of quantity; for division always proceeds from the one into the many. Yet quality preserves some property of its indivisible nature even when it is in a body. For, as the Platonists put it, the whiteness which is in a particular part of a white body should properly not be called part of the whiteness which is in the whole body. It should be called the whiteness of a part rather than part of the whiteness. Suppose you cut a white body into several parts: in each individual part will remain the same rational principle of whiteness, and the power and like action of whiteness; but the size will not be the same or equal. Hence division, strictly speaking, is not a characteristic of quality, but of body by reason of its quantity. Action pertains to quality, especially when quality is concentrated. So quality is not body; and when it is concentrated in a single point, it becomes totally incorporeal. Hence the activity of bodies does not arise from matter, but from the power of an incorporeal nature. Above the form that is divided in body there exists an indivisible form, namely soul. So far we have ascended from body to quality. Quality is the name I we give, in the Platonic manner, to all form which appears, divided up, in body. But should we stop at this point as the Stoics and Cynics do? Certainly not. Quality is a sort of form. Form's nature is simple, effective, swift to act. That is why the natural philosophers often call it "act." Such a nature is contaminated when it is in the bosom of matter. Instead of being simple, it becomes divisible and impure; instead of being active, it becomes subject to passion, to being acted upon; instead of being swift to act, it becomes clumsy and incompetent. So this sort of form is neither pure nor true nor perfect. If it is not pure, it cannot be the primary form. For everything must first exist as a pure example of its kind before it is corrupted. Again, if quality is not the true, it cannot be the primary form.  For how can the mind prove it is not entirely true, unless it can turn away to perceive another truer form in comparison with which quality is found wanting and shown to be in a manner false? Where then does the mind see the true form? It must either gaze outside itself or within. If it looks outside itself, then a true form, superior to quality, exists somewhere in nature. If the mind gazes within, then a true form is not absent from the mind, and therefore not absent from the world. Furthermore, the truth is stronger than what is false, since the  truth can exist without the false, whereas the false cannot exist without the truth. For nothing can be said to be false unless it is true that it is false. Nothing has validity unless it is true that it has validity. If a thing is truly understood to be false, then it is by truth that this is understood. A thing is not called false unless it deceives, and it does not deceive except by the appearance of truth. So if the truth is stronger than the false, and if the form that is less true, namely quality, exists as something in the order of things, then a fortiori a true form must exist in the order of things. In particular, insofar as intellect is superior to and truer than sense, intelligible form must be superior to and truer than sensible form. So it is clear that quality cannot be the primary form, because it is not pure and because it is not true. The same conclusion follows from its not being perfect. For the  primary member of any genus is the principle of the whole genus. \What is the principle of other things contains all that follow upon it. So what is first in its genus lacks nothing of its genus. The Sun, for instance, being first among luminaries, lacks no degree of light, whereas the other luminaries inferior to it, such as the stars and the elements, do not possess the full plenitude of light. The primary form therefore contains all the perfections of the subsequent forms and so cannot be imperfect. We are thus correct in concluding that a form described as imperfect cannot be the primary form. Because quality inheres in matter in such a way that it is expanded and divided together with matter, one could say that in the end it becomes material, and, if it is separated from matter, corrupted. It does not sustain itself but is sustained by matter as though by a substrate. If a thing cannot sustain itself, much less can it exist on its own. As it lies fallow in something else, it is certainly dependent on that something. Since quality is liable to change and destruction, it must be born from time to time. But nothing is ever born from itself. For what gives a beginning to what is born must precede what is born. But nothing can precede itself. Since quality is born from something else, and nothing can be born except from something superior to it, quality cannot, therefore, be nature's principle. But whence does it arise? From matter? Surely not. Matter of itself is a common substrate and possesses no form; it relates co all forms insofar as it can in an identical manner, whatever the occasion or the place. How then can it be embellished with different forms at different times and places except by way of something higher that affects it in different ways at different times and places? If matter is to give form to itself, we wish to know whether or not it already possesses that form by way of its own power before it bestows it on itself. If it does not possess that form, it cannot in fact conceive it. If it does possess it, then it is not prime matter, but something composed from matter and from the power of form. In that case, we have to inquire about this power. Does matter have it from itself or from another? If from another, then it has the form too from another. If from itself, then does it similarly possess the power because of some other power chat similarly belongs to it, and so on ad infinitum? Or does it have the power, not through some other power, but through its own essence? In that case, the essence of matter will be the same as the power or the substance that brings forms into being: matter will be the source of forms rather than their substrate. Or rather, matter will be form rather than matter, indeed the highest form of forms at that, the form chat brooks no division. le will not fluctuate ( as it now does) with the variety of fleeting forms, but by virtue of its eternal essence it will be endowed with the eternal forms. From this we can conclude chat matter in its own name has no power to procreate forms. A formless substrate cannot give itself form, being completely incapable of action, since action comes from form which is the source of being. If the matter which is shaped by arc, although not lacking form, is made not by itself but by the form of art into the form of an artifact, then certainly the matter which is subject to nature, although it is formless, is made not from itself but from the form of nature into a natural form. Where then does quality come from? Perhaps it is from another quality as one fire generates another? But this cannot be the answer. For quality cannot exist without the kindling of matter, and so is not in control of its own matter, much less matter extraneous to it. Thus the quality of one body cannot give form to another body through its own power alone. The natural body has no power to act through its own mass, which is passive and can only be acted upon. Nor does it have adequate power to act through quality. For the mode of existence of quality is not sufficient to provide body with an adequate mode of activity. A fire, for instance, has first to be generated by something before it can generate another; it needs to be an effect before it can be an efficient cause. It is characteristic of an effect that it depends on something else. If follows then that when fire acts in any way, it acts as the instrument of a higher cause. For if one particular fire were the first cause of the generation of fire, were, in other words, the highest cause (since any genus as a whole proceeds from the genus's first cause), it would be responsible for the production of all fire whenever and wherever it occurred. Thus it would be responsible for producing itself and any fire that came either before or after it. But since no particular fire can be the first cause of this kind of generation, we must ask about the cause of which it is (just] the instrument. Is it the instrument of another fire? Certainly not: first, because that cause is equal, not superior to it; and second, because the fire from which our fire had originated would either be out by now, or far away. Is it then the instrument of the other (three] elements? Again the answer is no. In dissimilar and contrary elements no rational principle exists for the generation of fire to which this fire (which is about to generate another fire) can be subject as instrument. Could it then be the instrument of heaven? Far from it. This fire can be the instrument of such a distant body only by way of an intermediary. But the intermediary bodies are not suited to the task. Or rather, one has to posit another fire placed between the heaven or sphere of fire and the other elements, in order to account for the generation of this fire on earth. That other fire will generate this fire, not the reverse. A similar argument will apply to the [other] individual species of natural things. Therefore over and above all these quality forms, there must be a certain incorporeal substance [or form) present in and ruling over all objects; and this penetrates the bodies, and the corporeal qualities are its instruments. For how else would individual qualities, which are by nature unstable and without order, preserve a stable order in the succession of generation, unless ruled by the stable order of a higher cause? And why should individual qualities always return to produce the same effects at certain appointed intervals of time, unless the one and the same cause that leads them at any {one] time were likewise to lead them at appointed times? The human mind in its day-co-day activities proceeds from particular forms to universal and absolute forms. From natural forms, which are limited co definite bits of matter, it customarily ascends by way of mathematical forms, for which indefinite matter will suffice, to metaphysical forms, which have no need of matter, definite or indefinite. Likewise it ascends from dimensions, which require both location and pares, co the point, which has no parts but in a sense has location; and again from points co numbers which need parts but not location. Finally, it wings its way from numbers to the unity which needs neither parts nor location. It travels beyond the unity which is indivisible but accidental to the unity which is substantial, in other words to the substantial form; it travels to the indivisible essence, at once the foundation and origin of all that is accidental, as to something fixed, and to the axis, in itself unchanging, of all chat is in itself accidental, changeable, always clinging to another. If the human mind has such a capacity for rational ascent, though it is only a part of the universe and encumbered by the chains of the body, even more certainly the universe possesses within itself a far greater capacity for the same ascent, especially as the order of the lowest mind takes its origin from the order of the universe. What has a more vigorous capacity for action will naturally produce action more quickly and on a larger scale. If all the universal genera, moreover, are led back to one some- thing in their individual genus, which is in a way indivisible and by whose simplicity they exist -for instance, change and time to the moment; natural form to the minimum natural degree; geometrical dimensions to figure; numbers to unity-why shouldn't the genus of substance be led back to an indivisible substance? We know that all mathematical figures, which participate in inequality, are led back to the figure of the circle, which is the most equal of all figures; and chat the figure of the circle is led back to the indivisible center, which is the beginning of all equality. In the same way, forms that are accidental and divisible are led back to the form that is substantial and divisible; and this form to the substantial and indivisible form. Similarly, just as beyond quality, which is liable to decrease and even remission, exists the substantial bodily form which is not subject to remission although it can decrease, so above this there must exist the substantial form which can neither fall into remission nor decrease, in order that ascent towards the better may be perfected in the best. Such will be the incorporeal substance, its principal characteristic being that it cannot be di-minished. It must exist somewhere in nature according to its proper form. Indivisible and simple things necessarily come before what are divisible and composite. For every single thing must exist before it can be extended or enlarged. The divisible and composite need the indivisible and simple, not the converse; for they arise from them and end in them. Therefore, if the divisible and composite exist according to their proper form in universal nature, a fortiori it must be possible to find the genus too of indivisible and simple things existing somewhere according to their proper form. Given the fact that nature sets its matter in motion more efficiently and to better purpose than art does its matter, we can infer that the principal form in nature dominates its matter more than the principal form in art dominates its. If that is so, two things follow: first, that in terms of position it is closer to its matter than art is to its; and second, that in terms of substance it excels its matter more than art excels its. Thus it is more capable of existing in itself and without matter. In reaching this conclusion I am particularly swayed by the following argument. All qualities exist as forms in another, and so, whenever they produce forms, they produce them in another. For they cannot beget children more free than they are themselves. They beget forms in the womb of matter. But that form alone that does not subsist in another makes and preserves the matter that does not subsist in another. For matter neither exists of itself-as it is imperfect and does not act of itself-nor does it exist because of qualities that it itself precedes. Rather it exists because of some form that precedes it. Such a form is totally incorporeal. The powers and activities of qualities are based on the power and activity of such an incorporeal form inasmuch as their works are always based on its work. I discuss this further elsewhere. Here we should recall that matter (and I am quoting the views of Mercurius Trismegistus and Tirnaeus) is without form. It is not nothing, but it is next to nothing, being primarily and to an unlimited extent that which is acted upon. In Plotinus' view it follows from this that the disposition closest to matter, namely dimension and quality, is completely insubstantial and exists, howsoever insignificantly, as a totally passive state. For dimensions are nothing other than extensions of matter itself, and qualities are nothing other than the affections of the same -mere shadows that come and go like the reflections of lofty trees in a rushing stream. Finally, Plotinus concludes that neither matter, since it is the prime patient, nor dimensions and qualities, since they are the first passive states of the prime patient, can be the first principles of actions. Thus Plotinus. Others, though they reach the same general conclusions, establish different distinctions. They agree that matter itself cannot initiate action; and that quantity too, if it is the passive extension of matter proceeding from some cause that extends matter, can do nothing, since it is the perpetual passive state of the prime patient. But if quantity is a sort of form by means of which the moving cause of matter extends matter, it does perhaps do something to its own matter. For it is the intermediary by means of which that cause appears to extend matter. But quantity can do nothing whatsoever to matter other than its own, since an agent is always necessarily distinct from a patient that impedes action. Quality, on the other hand, according to the Aristotelians, can do something both to its own and to alien matter. The argument has led us from matter, which acts neither upon its own nor upon alien matter, to quality, which in some way gives motion to both, by way of quantity, which affects only one sort of matter, namely its own. Should we then proceed without some intermediary from quantity, which in no way affects matter other than its own, to something that in the full sense may move matter other than its own? By no means. Yet quality is the closest thing to quantity. So it is not fully capable of action outside itself. If it is crippled when it comes to action, it is controlled by a higher substance which is fully capable. It is not surprising that quality is crippled; for at the moment of its birth it is scattered through the breadth and depths of matter, plunged, one might say, in the stream of Lethe. So every Time it tries to do anything, it is overwhelmed by matter, as by something infecting it. It has not the strength to get the better of matter on its own. So it cannot set anything in motion on its own, but only when strengthened by a higher cause. What gives it strength and direction is a kind of life, which can create life and sensation even out of lifeless mud, as in the generation of frogs and bees; a life which can beget from a pile of ugly dung a variety of beautiful flowers by way of a variety of beautiful seeds, which, as they are not often found in dung, must necessarily be in life itself. Life brings scattered bits of matter into order. Order comes from reason. Reason consists in life. Life consists in one indivisible power (for death occurs through division and dissolution). Again, life generates fire from the collision of cold bodies; and when the reflection of the Sun's rays in a mirror or a hot piece of iron, by way of the accidental quality of fire, sets wool aflame, it is this life, by means of the living seeds of fire, that produces the substantial form of fire in the wool. In us exists something that rather than consuming food all at once, breaks it down and digests it gently and in an orderly way. What do we suppose this is? What is it that brings inanimate foodstuffs to animate form in such a remarkable manner? What continually makes the heavy go upwards and the light downwards as life's need requires without any visible signs of force, in a way that is contrary to, indeed superior to, the nature of the objects? What is it that reconciles and forces unity on these objects in conflict? Certainly, it is not the simple hear of their fire, nor any of their other qualities; nor is it their divisible nature or their nature's bare property. Rather, it is some higher power, indivisible and lifegiving. What we observe in our selves apply to the universe as a whole, and conclude from all these arguments as follows. Bodily forms do not have sufficient power among themselves to generate anything living, but require the assistance of some higher cause. This higher cause, if it too were a form similarly joined to matter, again would itself descend from some further higher substance. Eventually, if we are to avoid infinite regress, we must reach some form which is unmixed with any bodies. But the power in the genus of forms is such that they can exist apart from matter. Even if someone were to claim that in themselves forms are joined but they are separated conceptually by the mind, that person would still have to admit that minds themselves have a separate existence since they separate other things. This is further shown by the fact that substance is, by nature and rank, prior to quantity and to other accidents. Now because what is prior can exist apart from what is posterior, a substance can exist without quantitative division. If it can exist, then somewhere it does exist, lest this perfection [ of substance] be absent in nature, and lest the potentiality [ for substance) be there in vain. For as regards those things which pertain to the eminent order of the universe, whatever can exist either already does exist -as the physicists believe -lest change were to befall what is eternal; or at least it exists at some time, lest something were to remain always without substance. And if life, which precedes sense only in terms of its origin in nature, does at this very moment exist somewhere of itself and without sense, there is all the more reason why sub-stance, which excels quantity in origin as in rank, should now exist somewhere in the order of nature separate from quantity. This is especially the case since the universe would be more perfect if certain substances were free of the chains of quantity than if certain lives were free of sense. Averroes, following Aristotle's view, proves that the corporeal and substantial form of the heavens contains no matter, since the heavens do not possess that potentiality for diverse forms which is the proper nature of matter. The heavens do, however, have dimension. Averroes believes that the form of dimension exists midway between natural forms and divine forms, since natural forms exist together with matter and quantity, and divine forms are totally free of both, but the form of the heavens must be midway between the two, lest nature were to proceed from one extreme to another without an intermediary. Averroes considers it reasonable, therefore, that the form of the heavens exists with quantity but not with matter. But I would extend the argument as follows. Since substantial form normally subsists in matter rather than in quantity, and since it is, by virtue of the order of its genus and nature, proportionately more related to matter than to quantity, then if it is able to exist somewhere without matter, a fortiori it is able to exist somewhere separated from quantity. A further argument. Proclus' opinion was that three types of bodies exist. First some bodies (to use his terminology) are at once material and composite, such as those compounded from the four elements. Then come the spheres of the elements themselves, which are material, certainly, but in a sense non-composite. Finally come the heavenly bodies, which are at once non-composite and non-material. He also posies, like Averroes, three types of forms. He offers the following general definition of the forms: "Form is that by means of which a thing distinctly both exists in ace and acts." This definition entirely excludes the dimensions, but perhaps it does indirectly refer to a substrate when it says "by means of which a thing," etc. He concludes that if some forms can exist without the material substrate, such as the heavenly forms, there is all the more reason why they can and should exist ( and in greater numbers) without dimension. Proclus and Syrianus offer the following proof of the same proposition. Whatever is extended by something else is necessarily confined by dimension, while what does the extending is not. So matter, which is always extended by another, is necessarily subject to dimensions. However, because everything exists in itself in a way before it is extended, we can think of matter as indivisible. All the more so then can the principle by which it is extended not only be thought of as without dimensions, but it can actually be so. Moreover, every divisible object is in a sense one whole composed from many parts. If the parts did not possess something that was one and the same and common to them all, they would never form chat whole. For the whole does not become one except from what is one. Again, if they did not participate in unity, none of the pares would be one, but several things, and so on ad infinitum: every pare would be numberlessly infinite. That one thing planted in the pares is not divided up piece-meal in each of the parts, otherwise it coo would need another to unite it. Therefore it is the same and it is whole in the individual parts. Such must be something incorporeal. Again, since everything corporeal is some one whole composed  of parts, what is the cause of its union? Does the whole itself unite the pares or do the parts unite the whole? Or does some-thing higher, which is neither a part of anything nor a whole made up of parts, unite the parts together into a whole? {Then) the whole would be following on the pares rather than uniting them. But if we admit it unites the pares, it will be incorporeal. For if it coo were divisible, it would require something in nun to unite it. But if the parts are uniting the whole, we will have the absurd result that union, which should be brought about by unity, is being brought about by plurality, which is the opposite of unity. Consequently, beyond the individual parts and the whole, exists one something, the cause of the harmony, which is incorporeal, lest it too is forced into needing a bond ( and so we would go on to infinity). So we should not suppose that any form divided up in a body  is the apex of nature and the principle of things. The universal principle must always have existed, and must always continue to exist, through its own power. le muse always have existed, because it could not have been produced at some time out of itself-for that would involve its pre-existing itself-nor could it have been produced from another -for nothing comes before what is first ( nothing else would ever have existed if the first had not existed first). It will always continue to exist, because, if the principle is once destroyed, the totality of things collapses, and neither the principle itself nor anything else can any more be restored co being. The principle must, therefore, possess infinite power by virtue    of which it can live eternally of itself. It will not have this power if  it is itself corporeal. For had it infinite dimensions, nothing else  would exist in things except itself. Had it finite dimensions, it  would have finite power too. I will omit other points elaborated  elsewhere: that neither body nor bodily form, being imperfect and  subject to change, can be a sufficient principle of motion, but that  everything corporeal is set in motion by something else; that a  craftsman who is intermingled with and affected by his product  cannot control his work; and that the perfect or first craftsman is  the architect of the world's edifice.  Let us pass then beyond bodily form and consider now the primary form which we next encounter. We have ascended from  body, which is, so to speak, at the lowest level, up to corporeal  form, which is half-way (because it has some aspects of body when  it is extended in body, but lacks others since it is not itself some thing composed of matter and form). Now we should proceed  from chis midpoint to the sublimer form, the incorporeal form  which has none of the characteristics of body, which gives bodies  their qualities, and which we call the true form or essence since  it exists through itself. Indeed, this is the third essence,  which  at the appropriate moment we shall call rational soul; the irrational soul accompanies it as a shadow accompanies the body. This  essence the Platonists adjudged both true and immortal, first, be cause it requires no parts into which it could at some point be  dissolved, or through which its power could be dispersed and  weakened; second, because it is not bound to any substrate with out which it would at some point cease to exist; third, because it is  not mixed with any contrary form, which might contaminate it;  and lastly because it is nor constrained by place, nor subject to  rime or motion ( on account of the indivisible and self-abiding simplicity of substance).    : IV : In its substance rational soul is motionless; in its activity it is mobile; in its power it is partly motionless and partly mobile. How shall we describe the nature of this third essence? Is it totally motionless, or is it subject to motion? We can be sure that it is not entirely motionless, because it is the source of the qualities that flow into matter which are constantly restless. Every cause acts in accordance with its proper nature. So some power and reflection of the cause has to be preserved in what it does. If this essence which is the cause of qualities were totally without motion because it always acted in accordance with its motionless nature, the quality deriving from it would retain some motionless nature in itself. What in fact happens is the opposite. Quality has three compo-nents: essence, power and action. All three are involved in motion. Its essence is generated and corrupted. Generation and corruption are effected through motion. The power of its nature too is intensified or remitted. Heat, for example, may be more or less intense. What varies in degree of heat at different times is clearly subject to change. The same is true of its action. The action of fire is to make something hot. It does not make water, for instance, hot instantaneously but in time. Now an act in time everyone calls motion. So quality is altogether subject to motion. Clearly, therefore, the disposition of bodies brought about by z qualities cannot remain exactly the same and alike for any period of time, but it changes continually either in terms of degree (going from one set of proportions to another) or for better or worse. Were someone to claim that an adult bodily disposition lasted an hour, the Platonists would ask him the following question; Is the power indisposition the same at the end of the hour as at the beginning? If it is not the same, then the power has not remained unchanged for an hour; for during the hour the disposition has changed with respect to its power. If the power is declared to be the same, then the disposition will lase another hour. For equal powers have equal effects. If it lasted an hour with a given amount of power, it will last another hour with the same power. Once the second hour is up, the same question can be asked. Is the power the same or not? If not, then the disposition did not last; but if it is the same, then it will last for the same time again. And so the Platonists will proceed like this ad infinitum and demonstrate that the nature of the body, if only it remained the same for an hour or for half an hour, would endure for ever. But no complexion of any body is in its own terms vigorous forever, since all complexions are extinguished in a brief while and perish, and thus they remain the same for hardly a moment of time. Because they begin and end at the same moment -a fully complete habit or condition of existing is incompatible, however, with beginning and ending-and because, in order to act, one needs the act of existing, the argument we reached in the discussion above appears to be confirmed: namely that in qualities a sufficient principle for acting does not exist. Let us then return to the question we posed. If there is in qualities qua qualities a motion totally devoid in a way of rest, how can qualities be produced without an intermediary by chat cause which is so far removed from them chat it has rest totally devoid of motion? If all things proceed from one extreme to the other through intermediaries -for instance, we go from winter to sum-mer via spring, from summer to winter via autumn-then between quality, which is fundamentally in motion, and essence, which is completely free from motion, we must necessarily posit something which is partly without motion and partly subject to it. So the substance which is the immediate progenitor of qualities cannot be entirely without motion. What are we to say then? Must we say that this substance is completely subject to motion? No, for either it would be in the genus of bodily qualities -yet we cannot come to a halt in that genus -or the cause which is located in the higher genus would not exceed its own effect with sufficient perfection if the substance which is the cause of quality were as unstable as quality. Therefore the substance must be partly at rest, partly in motion. It, too, has three components: essence, power and activity. Which of these is at rest and which in motion? Its activity cannot be at rest if the former two are subject to change. Its essence cannot be moved without the latter two being moved. So the first, its essence, will be at rest; the last, its activity, will be subject to change. What about the one in the middle, its power? It will be partly at rest, partly subject to change. : V : Above mobile soul is motionless angel. So far then we have discovered some sort of form above the body's complexion, which we shall call rational soul. Its essence always remains the same. This is proved by the stability of the will and the memory. Its activity, however, is liable to change, in that it does not think about all things simultaneously, but step by step; nor does it nourish, increase and generate the body in a single moment, but over the course of time. Natural power remains unchanged, because its natural vigor perpetually thrives, neither intensifying nor remitting. But acquired power does change, because it moves from potentiality to act and from act to habit and then back again. This was the point {in the argument] attained by Heraclitus, Varro and Manilius. '-But we must ascend further. For this form cannot be the principle of the whole of nature. For activity which is unchanging and performs its cask co complete perfection in a single moment is more perfect than activity which requires time. The life that is at once whole, united with itself. and not distant from itself is more pure and complete than the life that, having been extended over various different moments of time, is pulled apart from itself, one might say, in accordance with its inner actions and feelings. So above this form whose external activity wanders over intervals of time, and whose life, that is, internal activity, is dispersed as it were in a flood, we must posit another form, more sublime, whose activity is constant and whose life is at once whole and united. Since the perfect always takes precedence over the imperfect, it follows that, just as the perfect things in any genus are those which are such by their very nature, so the imperfect are those which are not such (otherwise they would be wholly such). If therefore the imperfect do not exist of themselves, they must exist by way of what are higher. Whatever is moved rushes out from potency and inactivity into act, seeking some terminus and end-point to its motion, as though it were not sufficient to itself but needed that which its motion directs it towards. But beyond what passes from inactivity to act, there always exists something that is full and unceasing act. Above what changes because it is deficient there must be something which does not move because it never needs anything or because it is already completely full. Although what is moved may be changed through [its) desire for improvement, it cannot improve except by acquiring a nature better than or superior to its own. Nor can it have the thing it seeks during motion. It can only acquire it after motion, and not from itself (for in that case no change would have been necessary), but from something else richer and fuller. What naturally lacks an end-point must be given one by some•  thing more perfect. Anything subject to motion lacks an end-point of itself, because it is not remaining at rest in itself. But if such a thing were the principle of nature, and since it will make everything by way of its changeable activity, then there will be no stability at all in things. Bur, in fact, stability is such a necessary element in things that even motion itself does not lack stability. For unless something affected by motion in various different ways were nor to remain the same in substance for some period of time, it would not change affections nor alter by degrees, bur altogether cease in an instant. Even the revolution of the heavens, being most ordered around the same center and the same poles, with the equality of its motions and the regular return of the constellations, participates in some stability. Just as what is at rest rests because of unity and is united in its rest (this I will demonstrate elsewhere), so what is moved is moved because of rest and is at rest in motion. When I say it is moved because of rest, it is because of some stability in its motive power. For were it not co remain in its power, it would not preserve any order in its motion; or rather its motion would not even last a short while. Again, it rests in motion, meaning it perseveres in the same, equal or like pattern of motion. Many things which are in motion with regard to one species of movement are not in motion with regard to other species; thus, they are partly in motion and partly at rest. Furthermore, since prime matter is eternal, anything chat is changed by way of its substantial form must remain unchanged by way of its matter. A fortiori, what is changed with respect to quantity, quality or location can, indeed must, remain the while unchanged with respect to substance. In short, what in no way remains when it loses stability is simultaneously forced to lose all motion coo. If, then, any stability exists in things, the first principle cannot be movable. So what is movable is not nature's principle. Therefore something exists above soul, in order that soul-which by its nature is open equally to understanding and co not understanding, switching as it does from the one to the other in alternation -may be ordered and determined for understanding through the influence, in this genus (of understanding}, of that which is always in act. Such a something is what is always understanding or always actually understood, which is the same. Furthermore, what is partly such is only such because of what s exists as wholly such. The log which is partly hot gets its heat from fire which is wholly hot. This is because what is such by its very nature, hot for instance, being totally comprehended by its nature, is totally comprehended by such a quality. On the other hand, what is partly such is not such by way of itself. The third essence, that is, soul, is not in its whole self understanding. For it has other natural characteristics besides understanding and these are without understanding. So mind in the soul is part of the soul bur also in some way part of the mind, of the higher mind, which is totally and only mind. If soul from itself possessed mind, the rational principle for generating mind would exist within the substance of soul, and all soul would thus be mind, mind perfect and complete; and every soul would possess mind, because the rational principle of soul is in every soul. And just as the power to move body, since it belongs to soul by nature, is present in individual souls, so the faculty of understanding would be present in all souls, including those of beasts, if it belonged by nature to soul. If above the nature which is less effective there has to be a nature which is more effective, and if the mind which is in the soul can neither produce by its own act alone any effect outside itself, nor rule over its soul's effecting power, then above the mind in the soul has to be a mind which by its own act is the producer of a work, and is the mistress over the power it has to effect it. It is reasonable to conclude then that just as the head of the soul is the mind, its most excellent part, so at the head of this mind, which belongs not to itself but to the soul, and is not independent but tied to the capacity of the soul, and is not dear but clouded and in a way irresolute -at the head of this mind, I repeat, is a mind which exists in itself, free and translucent. Presumably, this explains the riddle of the Magi: "There is something completely clear, something completely murky, something midway, partly clear and partly murky. "H In the order of bodies what is completely clear is a star above the Moon, what is completely murky is the air, and in between is the Moon. But in the order of spirits the mind is full of light, the irrational soul is empty of light, and the rational soul is the mean between the two, possessing part of the light of the intellect and lacking part. The pare it has from God, like the Moon from the Sun, it receives in different ways at different times, and it changes its shape. Justly, therefore, angel is above soul like a star above the Moon, refulgent with the light of its Sun, entire, forever, unchanging. Where the higher nature comes into contact with the lower, there it touches the lower's highest level with its own lowest level. For instance, the lowest level of fire touches the highest level of air. The intellectual nature is superior to the corporeal nature and makes contact with it to the extent that what is most outstanding among bodies may participate in the intellectual soul, but not the lower elements at all, which are legion. Now the most excellent bodies, according to the Platonists, are those of the celestial beings, of demons and of men. But are the minds attached to such bodies the highest sorts of minds. Surely not, or the lower nature would reach the peak of the higher nature without an intermediary. Therefore, just as below bodies endowed with mind is a multitude of bodies without mind, so above minds implanted in bodies is a multitude of minds unattached to any bodies. Indeed, even more of them exist than species of body, for rational souls, as I shall demonstrate elsewhere, have their existence between eternity and rime. The excellence of eternity seems to demand that there should be more species, more perfections, in it in a way than exist in time. I shall not dwell on the fact ( which I shall discuss later) that the distance between souls and the first principle is infinite, but the space between souls and matter is finite. Hence it ought to surprise no one that many more degrees of angels are able to exist above souls than degrees of forms below souls. When a single thing is made up of two components, and the one of them that is less perfect is found to have an independent existence somewhere apart from the other, then a fortiori the one that is more perfect and less in need should be able to exist somewhere without the other. An animal is made one from intellectual substance, that is, rational soul, and from body. But we have seen that many bodies exist and are alive without such an intellect. Is there any reason then that prevents many minds from being unattached to bodies? Such minds will be above souls united to bodies. Minds joined to bodies, insofar as they are minds, do not by themselves constitute the species of animal. They are parts rather of a species which is composite, and in order co understand they mainly consider sensible objects; and on this account they are in some respect imperfect, and they act imperfectly. In any genus we must ascend from imperfect things to the per- feet since the perfect naturally come first. Thus the argument leads us from minds chat are conjoined to minds chat are separate, minds which as species themselves are enough co constitute their own species and which gaze in understanding upon chose things which are in themselves intelligible. Because by way of its understanding and its will the mind does not depend of necessity on body, it naturally separates forms and treats of them in their separation. It profits more from rest than from motion and is by nature free from the body and from motion. Thus it better suits its nature co live apart from the body and from motion than to live in the body and in motion. Yet many minds do lead a life subject to motion in bodies. Even more reason then for there to be minds, very many of them, leading a life free from motion and separate from bodies. Could anyone deny that it is more proper for an incorporeal substance, following the nature of its genus, to be outside the body than to be in the body, and that therefore there should be more species of it separated from the body than species conjoined? For whatever is most natural to a particular genus exists in it to the fullest possible degree. Such then are the angels who move the world's bodies but are not moved at all themselves by the motion of those bodies. Souls, on the other hand, when they set bodies in motion, are themselves moved. An agent of motion which variously moves together with the body it moves cannot keep the tenor and order of the motion regular and stable unless a motionless mover rules over it. So the perpetual order of the world's revolution is evidence that above souls certain movers exist that are motionless. The elements, because they consist of matter in flux and are always contaminating each other, would of themselves preserve no order, unless they were controlled by the strictest law of celestial motion. But since the heaven too is perpetually in motion of itself and therefore wanting, the stable order in its motion does not stem from itself, but from a higher mover that is absolutely motionless and undivided. Such stability and oneness does not persist in things so different from each other and so much in motion, unless it is from some axis, completely stable and completely one, which is ultimately derived from oneness and stability itself. As what is movable is related to what is movable, so mover too is related to mover. So just as an element which is movably moved is related to heaven which is stably moved, so heaven's movable and changeable mover is led back to the mover which is stable and united, and finally what is stable and united is led back to stability and oneness themselves. The action we refer to as "moving" follows upon the mover; and following upon this action is the passion we refer to as "being moved": it cannot happen the other way round. For the prior are not led by the posterior, but the reverse. It is much more likely that the action we call "moving" should exist somewhere without the passion we call "being moved" than that the passion should exist apart from the action. Yet such a passion in bodies does exist apart from action. Therefore somewhere action will exist far from passion, in order that, just as bodies are moved but do not move, so the angels may move but not be moved. This is what Zoroaster was referring to when he said: "The world has intellectual motionless rulers." So just as souls, which are partly movable and partly motionless, surpass qualities, which are entirely movable, so angels who are entirely motionless surpass souls. That angels exist and exist in large numbers Aristotle shows in ro the eleventh book of his Metaphysics: "The movement of the heavens, which is continuous, orderly and, as far as its nature permits, without defects, must come about through a mover chat may not be moved either in itself or accidentally. As there are many such movements in the heavens, each separate from the other, different in species and in power, they must be the result of several such movers. These of course cannot be bodies, or they would have to be themselves moved by something when they were imparting morton, and so on necessarily ad infinitum. Nor can they be forms in bodies, or else it would come about that they are moved along with the body chat is moved. We must have recourse to a perfect mover, that is, to the motionless mover, in order to ensure that no motion would ever deviate from its course. Such movers are minds; for in forms that are totally free of matter what is understood and what understands are the same thing." Thus Aristotle. It was the Hebrews and later philosophers who n called these minds angels and messengers. Avicenna maintains at one point that the chief angels number no less than ten; but at another he seems to indicate there are far more.  Aristotle argues that the number of minds is no less than the number of motions in the heavens; and he admitted he had calculated a number using a likely proof, but concluded chat he should leave the matter co others wiser than himself.  He suspected, it seems, that the minds should be enumerated according to their own peculiar and principal activity, that is, understanding, and not according to a shared and secondary activity, that is, motion. Moreover, although they may be the final causes of motions, he was prophesying perhaps that the minds should not be reckoned [simply] according to the number of motions, and that a very large number of minds could exist which have not been allocated to imparting motion to bodies. So it is not unreasonable to conclude that the angels are almost numberless, as I indicated above and will demonstrate now in the following manner. If the species of natural objects in matter, although confined within a substrate, are distinguished one from another not because of the substrate but of themselves, and are expanded to the greatest number, then a fortiori the substances, which exist independently above matter, are distinguished of themselves, and, given the extraordinary fertility of their genus which is freed from matter, are multiplied into species almost without number. Further, an intelligible genus would seem by its very nature to be more easily multiplied than a corporeal one, since numbers, dimensions, shapes, proportions, the density of bodies, the speed of motions, all are limited in bodies themselves. But in mind they are extended at will and without limit. Again, what are particular in matter become universal in mind. Finally, intellect, which is beyond all bodies, can think at will about innumerable things incorporeal and corporeal alike. Since an intelligible genus can be multiplied much more, therefore, than a sensible genus, and since a potency so valuable to the universe must not be always in vain, many more species of separate substances than species of bodily substances undoubtedly exist in act. This is especially since a superior potency accomplishes its act in the universe more immediately and more effectively than a weaker potency. Finally, the fact that the universe's order has been arranged in the best possible manner under the control of an infinite good would seem to require that everything better in it should, as far as possible, be multiplied and should exceed the quantity of worse things ( especially since inferior things have been made for the sake of the superior). This is obvious if we consider the world spheres. The nobler a sphere is, the bigger it is. Earth and water vis-a-vis the higher spheres we suppose like a point compared to the circumference. What is dimension in bodies seems in incorporeal entities to be number. So it is reasonable to infer that, inasmuch as intellectual substances are the best, and have an independent existence, and are the ends at which all corporeal entities aim and for which they are created, they muse be far more numerous than both the motions of the spheres and the total number of bodies. Dionysius the Areopagite testifies to this when he says that the species of intellectual entities existing separately outnumber those of corporeal entities.  It is reasonable to suppose that the all-powerful Creator of the universe had the capacity, the knowledge and the will co render His work as most like Himself as possible. He has created it most like Himself in that He has taken the pure minds, which of all things are most like Himself, and has exalted and extended them over and above the forms that are combined with matter by an immeasurable space (if I may call it such). Hence, the saying of the prophet Daniel, "Thousand thousands ministered unto Him, and ten hundred thousands stood before Him." In distinguishing the orders of angels, Dionysius made particular use of the numbers three and nine, and occasionally of seven. We find the number twelve in the Christian mysteries. Iamblichus and Proclus, the Platonists, follow Dionysius here. °For they divide the highest and middle angels into three and nine orders; but the angels who follow are divided into seven orders, and the lowest angels into twelve. Since for the Platonists, however, the different orders of bodies are shadows or reflections [ of the orders] of rational souls, and the orders of souls are images [of the orders] of the angels, accordingly some distinguish the orders of angels according to the orders of bodies and of souls together. But more of this anon. Above angel is God; for just as soul is mobile plurality and angel motionless plurality, so God is motionless unity. Platonists believe that angel is entirely without motion in essence, power and activity; for it is always the same, its capacity is constant, it understands everything at the same moment, it wills the same things, and, insofar as it can, it does whatever it does instantaneously. That is what the Platonists say. The views of ochers I will relate elsewhere. But reason does not permit us to rest at this point [in the argument] with Anaxagoras and Hermotimus; it bids us to mount higher. Soul, because it is in motion, passes from one thing to another.  So it contains within itself the one thing and the other. Because it has both, it contains plurality. Soul then is in itself a certain plurality, a plurality, I repeat, in motion. Angel, which immediately precedes soul, cannot be a motionless unity; because the distance between these two particular things -one a plurality in motion, the other a motionless unity-appears to be too immense. Unity is, of course, the opposite of plurality, and what is motionless, of what is moved. But since in every respect these two are the opposite of each ocher, they cannot come one immediately after the other: they need some connecting link. Now angel precedes soul, which is plurality in motion, without any intermediary. Therefore angel cannot be motionless unity, otherwise the two extremes would be joined without an intermediary. But we have already demonstrated that angel is certainly motionless. Thus it cannot be unity. It remains then that angel is motionless plurality. It conforms to soul in that like soul it is a plurality; but it differs from soul in that it is motionless while soul is moved. So we are obliged to posit some sort of plurality in angel. But what sore Jc has co be a plurality appropriate to intellect, that is, one that has as its essence and being the power of understanding, the act of understanding, and the many species of things understood. Bue since angel is not entirely simple but possesses number, and since unity must be above number as the origin of all number and itself not lacking unity ( whereas plurality by its very nature lacks unity), then something else must exist above angel that is not only motionless but entirely one and simple. This is God, the most powerful of all in that He is the simplest of all. Since union consists in simplicity, and power in unity, no one would dare say that God is compounded from many things, because if God were compounded correctly, He would consist of something resembling a substrate and of something else resembling a form. In that case, God would not be in every respect the most perfect, since one part in Him would be less perfect than the other and both parts less perfect than the whole. Nor would God be the highest agent, because He would do whatever He does, not by way of His whole self, but by way of one of His parts,form. Nor would He be most blessed, because He would not be delighting everywhere in Himself; for He would not be embracing His whole self in every part. He would be seeing something in Himself other than God, since the part and the whole are not the same. Undoubtedly He is more blessed if everything He sees in Himself is Himself, and if He is never absent from Himself but everywhere appears whole to Himself. Finally, the part posited in God as a substrate, because one thinks of it in itself as formless, cannot form itself. The other part which performs the role of form, not having an independent existence, clearly cannot bring itself into existence. Thus chis composite god will be formed by some higher form, and that higher form rather will be God. So much for the first proof that God is above angel. Your mind is to your soul what your eye is to your body. Your  mind is the eye of your soul. Similarly, the light of truth bears the same relationship to the eye of your soul as the light of the Sun to your bodily eye. Your bodily eye is not itself light but has the power to perceive light; so coo your mind soul's eye, is not itself the truth though it can perceive the truth. Your mind seeks the truth; but the truth does not seek itself, nor does the truth admit the false by which your mind is often deceived. Imagine your eye growing so that it fills your whole body, and, when every species of limb has disappeared, chat the universal body is a single eye. If this ampler eye sees something, it will still see nothing other than the same light of the Sun which it saw when it was confined [to the eye-socket]. But it will receive the same light in greater abundance. In the light everywhere it will see the colors of bodies and see them all together at a single gaze. It will not glance from side to side in order to see, but remaining motionless it will regard everything equally. The light, however, will still be one thing, the eye another. If vision was put in us in order to comprehend light, then vision is one thing, light another. Light has no need of vision, as light itself has no more light to receive. Now imagine that your mind has such power over your soul that with the rest of the parts of the soul effaced, those concerned with imagination, sense and generation, your whole soul is one mind alone. This remaining sole, uncontaminated mind will be angel. This mind, I say, in all its amplitude will look upon the same truth asmind did when it was confined, but it will receive truth in greater abundance, and in truth will observe all true things at a single gaze (to put it Platonically), and not hunt now for one thing, now for another. Yee mind and truth will still be different things. Zoroaster unfolded it like this: "Be aware that the intelligible lies outside the mind.'' If mind has been made to perceive the truth, then the mind in need of the truth is different from the truth. For truth has no need of the mind as a way to grasp the truth. Were the mind and the truth the same, every mind would always speak the truth and every truth would participate in mind. But in the event, human minds are deceived, and there are many truths in a way which are missing a mind [ to perceive them]. Truth is not only different from mind, it is something superior.  For the mind needs truth, but truth does not need mind. The domain of truth extends further than chat of mind. Intellectual art is to be found in individual forms, but is not present in unformed matter. Yet matter is truly called matter and truly it is the substrate of all natural objects. But if truth is superior to mind, and because it is superior does not lack inferior goods, then truth does not lack the clarity of mind. However, existing in it are not two things, truth and clarity, but rather simplest truth, truth not hid-ing from itself just as light, though it has no eye separate from itself, does not hide from itself. For God is clearest truth and truest clarity or sight, the light seeing itself the vision giving light to it• self. He is the spring of intellectual clarity and light, by whose light and whose light only the clarity of the mind perceives.  We say chat wood is hot by a certain participation, but that fire heats in accordance with its form, and chat the Sun hears in a more excellent manner in accordance with its eminent power and as the cause of heat. Similarly, soul participates in mind, angel possesses the form of mind, but God is the all-effecting source of mind. As Plotinus would put it, God is understanding itself. n God is not in any particular intellect as its potentiality, and He is not the understanding of the truth as of an object. He is understanding existing in itself and of itself. It is as though vision were not in any sight and were not the vision of an alien light, but remained in itself and were the vision of itself. Intellect exists everywhere as the potentiality for understanding, even if it understands itself. Yet insofar as it is [itself] intelligible, it is said to be prior in a way to itself insofar as we think of it as intellectual. For what is intelligible, being first and pre-eminent, moves, forms and perfects the intellectual power which is posterior and inferior to it. That is why some people call God the intelligible or the understanding rather than the intellect, although, as we shall see later, even these names are not strictly appropriate to God. A further argument. The function of the soul is to provide vital  motion, since the soul itself is a kind of life. The function of the mind is to order by means of forms. It is itself a kind of form or species and operates by species, as we can see in our own mind. That vital motion flows through every living thing but does not belong to things lacking life. But orderly arrangement by way of forms is proper to even non-living things, for they do not lack order and species. Mind is superior to soul to the same extent that the order of forms extends further than life. But because beyond the order of forms is the universe's formless prime matter where certain seeds of forms lie hidden and ferment, if I may put it like that, the office of mind, which is bounded by forms, does not embrace these formless seeds. Yet matter is in a way good because it is desirous of the good, namely of form, and because it is open to receiving the good, and because it is necessary for a good world. Seeds also are good as they are the rudiments of good forms. Goodness exceeds mind to the same degree the distribution of the good extends further than the distribution of the species. The more powerful each thing is, the more far-reaching its activity. The following arguments bear on this point. All things desire  the good, but all things do not desire mind. For not everything is capable of attaining mind and wisdom, and so there are many things that do not desire it, or else they would desire it to no purpose. If all things in desiring are turned towards the good, but not all cowards mind, and if all things turn back in the direction whence they departed, then all things come from the good and not from mind. So the good rather than mind is the first cause of things. Furthermore, what possesses mind does not stop at mind but seeks still for the good. The proper characteristic of mind is a certain striving for understanding. After this striving, the mind is either worse off than it was before, or better, or exactly the same. It cannot be worse off because activity in itself is a sort of perfection, and because nothing deviates towards the worse except through force or ignorance, and neither of these befalls a mind that is pure and free. It cannot be exactly the same, for then it strives in vain, because it accomplishes nothing and nothing strives for what it already has. Therefore mind is trying to improve itself. It follows then that it is not itself the good. For the good cannot improve. In understanding, the mind drinks deep of goodness, but it drinks from a source other than itself. For were it to have this source within, it would not need to strive for it in order to accomplish its activity. The source from which it quaffs goodness is the good itself, which exists above it, since it can pour down the liquor of its perfection into the mind. We seek wisdom and mind only through the impulse of reason, but we seek the good even before any incitement of the reason. Our every appetite is always for the good, not always for mind. We desire understanding for the sake of the good and not vice versa. Nature then values the good more highly than mind, since it draws us towards the good earlier, more frequently and more strongly. Wherefore some people suppose they have advanced sufficiently far in philosophy if they appear to have wisdom, even though they do not have it. But they do not suppose this of life, unless they truly possess what they judge to be chiefly the good for themselves. If the good by natural instinct is regarded as more precious than mind, it is regarded as more eminent. Hence to understand in and of itself is not enough for us, unless we understand cor-rectly and understand the good. For often we reject knowledge for a while, if we suspect it will be bad for us and injurious. But we can never refuse the good. Often too we choose pleasure before the contemplation of things. But we can never choose anything in preference to the good for the reason it is good. Nothing is more a necessity than the inducement of the good, since no one is able not to wish for the good. (Yee) nothing is more voluntary than the inducement of the good, for we wish for all things on account of the good; or rather we wish for the good everywhere in all things so freely and so joyfully that we also wish to be incapable of not wishing it. Thus, since in the good the highest necessity coincides with the highest freedom, and the sovereignty of the good is both entirely a necessity for its subjects and entirely a matter of free will, it is agreed chat all things take their origin from it as from their father, and chat all things aspire to it as to their fatherland. (which is what we want). But if we grant the third option, namely that they could be partly alike, partly unlike in nature, then, since they could not both agree and differ on account of the same principle, they would possess a common nature through which they agree, and two peculiar natures, moreover, in the two of them, over and beyond the common nature, through which they disagree. Therefore neither A nor B would be simple, but each would be compounded from the common nature and the peculiar property. Neither would be first, because they would depend on that which has united their mutually different parts into one. Neither would be self-sufficient, since the whole needs its parts, and one part needs the other. Neither would be all-powerful, because neither is completely united. That common nature, which A and B each possess in like mea- sure and by virtue of which both of them equally are principles, will be the principle rather than the two of them. Or rather, what gives the common nature to these mutually different principles will be the principle. For this one nature, which lies at ease in some and is cramped within the bounds of others, flows from that unity which depends upon itself and is confined by no limit. That one common nature, therefore, comes to both A and B from elsewhere and comes from a higher principle. Nay, even those two peculiar natures, through which A and B differ, come to them from outside. For except for these two peculiar natures no faculties is left in A and B but the one common nature, from which, if they are born perfect, the peculiar natures which are added to A and B will no longer be different, as the metaphysicians suppose.  Rather, they will be one and the same property in both A and B, the same vein gushing forth. For the same property will gush out and flow back in accordance with the perfect manner of [its] pure nature. Thus if two perfect properties are present in A and B, they necessarily come from outside. Therefore each accepts its essence's property from elsewhere, and because each is allotted its own nature from elsewhere, neither exists through itself but is made by a higher principle. In any natural genus what is the highest of that genus is solely one. If two highest lights exist, each, in that it is the highest light, unites [with the other) and one faculties results. But if two faculties still exist, they differ by way of another nature rather than by way of the light. Therefore another nature is also present which is different from the light and by whose contagion the light becomes murky and is not the highest. So too the highest heat is that which is not mixed with told or any faculties else. For were it mixed, it would be perceived [from being the highest heat]. It would have the capacity to become more and more fierce only if it were purged. mefore the highest in any genus is one alone and of that genus' one nature alone. Take the highest light: it is one light, not two, and it is only light, not light together with some faculties else. Now God is the highest of all faculties. Therefore God is one and simple: indeed, God is the one highest unity, the one highest truth and goodness, one God. For the Platonists, God is one for three reasons. Firstly because He is highest unity. For if whatever is highest is one of its kind, what could be more one of its kind than highest unity? Each particular plurality of innumerable objects is brought back to its own unity: the plurality of human beings to a single human species, that of horses to the one equine species, and so on. Take all these particular unities, which are bound by a certain number, that is, rake the species of faculties, and collect them into one common unity, namely God, the lord of species, in order that, just as infinite pluralities of individual entities may be brought back to the finite unities of their species, so the finite unities of the species may be brought back to the unique unity above species. It is appropriate that, just as each particular order of faculties is led back to its own one principle, so the universal order of faculties may be led back to the one universal principle. And just as individual materials are led back to one matter-all the world's members to one body-so all the world's natures should be led back to one nature, all the world's lives to one life, all (its} movements to one movement, all (its] movers to one mover. Next, when several faculties that naturally differ from each other  unite in one common order, necessarily such an order must exist among them on account of the order they possess with respect to one single faculties. For instance, the order that exists between the parts of an army is the result of the order of the whole army in relation to the one leader. For the fact that faculties which differ one from another are able to be united in mutual communion does not arise from their own peculiar natures; for in these they differ, being disunited rather because of them. Nor does it arise from having various different agents impose order on them; for agents who differ in their natures, to the extent that they differ, do not incline towards one order. And so the order shared by many faculties either arises by chance, or it is imposed by one primary agent who directs every faculties towards a single end. Now all the parts of the world, however much they differ, are brought together in mutual order, because they make up one body and they borrow natures and are borrowed in rum. Lower bodies are moved by higher bodies, higher bodies by incorporeal nature. Nor does this order come about by chance, because it is always the same and alike, reweaving the like fabric in a like manner. God then is the single agent who gives order to the single universe. God is one, by the Platonists’ first argument, because He is unity. God is one, by the Platonists’ second argument, because He is  truth. The highest truth is one. For were there two highest truths, then either one of them has what the other has, or it does not. If the first, one truth exists, not two; if the second, neither truth is the highest. For one truth lacks the portion of truth in the other, and the other the portion of truth in the one. God is one, by the Platonists' third argument, because He is  the highest goodness. c highest goodness certainly embraces whatever good can be found anywhere. Were you to assume two highest goodnesses, whatever good is in the one would also be in the other (otherwise neither of them would be the highest), so that in terms of the nature of the good they would be one, not two. But no faculties else but the nature of the good is mingled with them, or they would nor be the highest goodnesses but rather impure goodnesses. So they are completely one. Lastly, if two gods exist, and each of them is equally capable of  bringing this whole universe into being, then neither of them will make the world ( in which case the power to generate in both of them will be to no purpose, and the world will nowhere exist); or one of them will create the world {in which case the other's power to generate will be wasted); or both of them will create a whole world (in which case there will be two worlds utterly and mutually alike, only one of which would suffice, the other being superior). But if one of them is capable of making the whole world, and the other only part of it, then the one incapable of making the whole world is nor God, and he will materials to no purpose the part of the world which the other god made at the same time he made the whole world. If each, however, has the power to create half of the world, neither of them is the universal principle. And since the parts in the one whole join together for one end in nature's harmony, the paired gods will have to be referred to one god who is higher, so that the motion produced by the two gods from their harmony-a harmony derived from some one higher god may be reduced to one motion. If you maintain that twin gods create two completely distinct 0 and different worlds, you must accept that the two gods and the two worlds never accord in any way. How then does each of these gods exist and how is it one god -is alive, intelligence, and active-and how is each of these worlds one world, and a corporeal work? Therefore the twin worlds will be in mutual accord. But the one nature which harmonizes them is derived in the end from one principle, not from two. Again, if both gods were always to desire the same end, either one would come from the other or both would come from a higher one, or, at the least, share one substance. For if they did not have that much in common, they would not work for the same end. Either way, there is only one god. But if one god wants this same creation but the other does not, then this creation will both come into being and nor come into being, exist and not exist, if the one god's yea is equally as strong as the other god's nay. For the god whose will always prevailed would be God alone. But if they were sometimes to agree with each other, and sometimes to disagree, and sometimes one were to have the upper hand, sometimes the other, then both of them would be subject to change. Nor should we agree with the Manichean and Gnostic philosophers when they declare there are two gods, one the author of all good faculties, the other the author of all evils. For just as God, who is the author of good faculties, is the highest good and totally without evil, so His opposite is the highest evil, deprived of all good. He will not be capable, therefore, of action or knowledge; will not be alive; will be entirely without existence. For existence, life, and understanding are all good and are covered as goods. : III : No plurality of gods exists one above the other without end. Grnced, you may say, that there is a god above angel and that he  is one, and thus that many equal gods cannot exist. Yee one god could still exist above another without end. Although I believe this position has been refuted by earlier arguments, additional proofs will disprove this more clearly. Were there innumerable gods, the causes of faculties would be  infinite, each more powerful than the other in numberless succession, since indeed these gods are the causes of faculties and are set one above the other in numberless succession. Were that so, there would also be an infinite number of effects in the world. For every cause produces its particular effect in the order of faculties; and as the causes differ in their power, so too do the effects. Thus infinite effects would descend, each one weaker than the one preceding it, in numberless succession, if the causes were infinite, each one excelling the other in numberless succession. Since a higher cause always projects its power to produce effects further than a lower cause, the projection of such effects would proceed to infinity if the ascent of causes were infinite. Surely anyone can see this is absurd. To begin with, if there  were no first faculties in the world, there would be no consequents. For every faculties is derived from the first, and were this not to exist anywhere, the source of the issuing forth of faculties, Towing as they do one from another, would never get started. Secondly, we see in the world that some faculties are more perfect than others, and that the power of perfection increases as we ascend and diminishes as we descend. Hence the natural strength of faculties gradually weakens as we descend. Inevitably then, at some point in this gradual diminution, it disappears altogether. So it is not possible to have one faculties below another in an infinite series. So there will not be endless effects. So there will not be endless causes, since, in as much as perfection increases as we ascend, it is cleat that at some point perfection will attain its goal. Why do we consider soul better than body unless it is because it is closer to the highest goodness? If there were no highest goodness anywhere but an infinite ascent from good to good, then body would be an infinite distance from highest goodness, and soul would be similarly. One infinite distance is neither greater nor smaller than another. And there would be no rational principle or ideal measure by which some faculties could be preferred to others. Soul then would be no closer to and have no more in common with goodness than body would; it would be no better than body, therefore, and angel would be no better than soul. Whatever flows from some faculties else is by nature in Rux, for it  does not exist on its own but comes into existence by way of a certain Rux. If there were no first some faculties in the world, every faculties would Tow from some faculties else, and so all would be in flux. Unity would nowhere exist, nor equality, similarity, stability, order or restoration. But since these do exist in faculties, the Rux of faculties Towing out one from another must be led and kept in check through the stability of some axis which does not Tow out from another. In the same way the interminable Rux of liquid bodies must be terminated, not by another liquid body likewise Towing away, but by a solid body. Finally, any higher level does some faculties to the lower, and in turn receives some faculties from the level above it. If there were no first level in faculties and no last level, every intermediate level would depend on an infinite number of higher levels and in return produce an infinite number of lower. It would therefore receive an infinite number of perfections from the higher, since it receives from any of its causes some faculties good; and it would bestow an infinite number of gifts on those below, for it would distribute some faculties to each of them. So it would be full of measureless power and limitless perfections. Thus all faculties would be equally infinite. No one faculties would be more outstanding than another, no cause would be better than its effect. Or perhaps any faculties would be infinitely finite, because it would be exceeded endlessly by its antecedents; or yet again, any faculties would be infinite, because it would rule over endless consequents. No true knowledge would exist anywhere, because one cannot understand infinite causes of faculties. No faculties would exist in the universe to excite or check the appetite, if there were no first principle and ultimate end, for every appetite is excited and fortified by its power. Let us accept then that one universal principle exists. Let us call  it unity, for in the perfection of its simplicity it towers over all. Let us call it truth, for in producing it gives existence to all. Lee us call it goodness, for in recalling all faculties, having once created them, back to itself, it endows them with well-being. St. John was the most divine of all theologians ( the Platonist Amclius gladly embraced him),~ and his theology reaches us to call unity the principle, truth the reason of the principle, and goodness the love of the rational principle. And let this substance -unity that is true and good, truth that is one and good, goodness that is one and true-be the one, the good, the true God. Because He is unity, He is truth; because He is true unity, He is goodness. He enfolds all in unity, He unfolds all in truth, He pours forth all in goodness. After all faculties have issued from Him, they flow back again through goodness, are reformed through truth, are restored to oneness through unity. : IV : God's power is unlimited. Just as extreme dispersion leads to infinite weakness, so in the J highest unity dwells infinite power. Act by its very nature contains no limit, for to be subject to a limit is passion, which is the opposite of act. Therefore act is only subject to a limit to the extent that it depends on a substrate which possesses a degree of passive potentiality. The divine act, however, subsists in itself. The active power, insofar as it is power, is not itself confined to a fixed number of levels. For what prevents the power as power from being • BOOK II • CHAPTER IV · thought about or from existing on one level as on another:' Therefore it accepts no limit as to its levels except from the passive potentiality into which it is mixed, or from a limiting cause. But the divine power is unmixed and is the highest power. Being itself, considered absolutely, is unmeasurable, because it can be communicared to an infinite number of faculties and be thought about in innumerable ways. So if the being of any faculties is finite, it must either be limited by its cause or by its substrate. Neither of these conditions applies to God. In infinite being is infinite power just as in finite being is finite power. In pure no facultiesness there is no habit (or condition] of being of any sort, true or imaginary. For who can define no facultiesness by reason of being:' It follows that in pure being there is no privation of being, no potentiality for nor-being, whether truly or in the imagination. Therefore what pertains to His eternity cannot be compelled or thought nor to be; nor can any degree of power which the mind can conceive be wanting to it. Otherwise mind, which is the effect of [i.e., is caused by] God, would be able to extend itself beyond God, the mind which can always think of a further degree in a finite scale of degrees. Or rather, the mind would be disposed in vain for infinite progression unless it found some infinite limit. Given that truth and goodness lack no pare of the true and the good, all chose degrees, however many, are present to them, degrees that can be understood as true or desired as good. Such degrees are numberless. The further a passive potentiality is from act, the stronger every  agent who brings it into acc. For instance, one needs a greater power to heat water than to heat air. But what is totally non-existent is infinitely distant from act and has no potentiality for receiving the act of existence. We shall discuss this later in more derail. Whether God created some faculties our of no faculties a little while ago, therefore, or whether He continuously produces the prime matter of bodies and the essence of minds and souls using no pre-existent substrate, and keeps them in existence ever dependent on the prime act, that is, His act divine, He undoubtedly possesses an unlimited power of areion. In short, the movement and the order of this vase complex machine, so regular over so many centuries, demonstrate that the power of its governor is inexhaustible and therefore infinite. For finite power over the course of infinite time, or even over a long period of finite time, becomes tired and halting. It is from God's infinite power that all intellects therefore receive the ability to understand always and with certainty; that souls receive the ability to think discursively without end; that matter has its unlimited potentiality for receiving; that movement and time can Aow on without limit; that even the generation of faculties can continue in its endless alternating succession, as the natural philosophers suppose. For they think that action and infinite motion derive from infinite power, and that any faculties said to be infinite, whether potentially or in any other way, is so, and is adjudged so, because of that highest infinity which exists in act. Hence the divine nature is called by Orpheus "the infinite end." God is everlasting. The stronger the power by which any faculties endures and is preserved, the longer that faculties If this is so, then God by His infinite power endures Himself and preserves all other faculties to infinity. Divine truth precedes every beginning of faculties and succeeds their every end. For it WS true before each's beginning that there would be a beginning; and It will be true after each's ending that there was an ending. But whatever is true at any time is true because of truth. But if the truth is said to have begun at a certain time, then long before, because of the same truth, it was true that that truth would begin at a certain time. And if we suppose it comes to an end, even after that, because of the same truth, it will be true that that truth has come to an end. For one cannot think of truth as ever beginning or ending. Again, if God exists totally beyond movement and time, then He does not sustain change within time and matter with regard to being and nor-being from an earlier to a later state. If God is absolutely necessary being, as I shall demonstrate below, He could never have nor been and He could never nor be. Finally, if some faculties is born at some time, it comes from some faculties prior; and whatever dissolves, dissolves into some faculties older. What is first cannot have begun and cannot end. We often mentally conceive of a simple duration without beginning or end, and we call It, as it were, sempiternity. This is God Himself even if we do nor realize it. For every simple infinity is God Himself. But the phantasy prevents us from perceiving this, for it straightway rakes this simple unchanging sempiternity and endows and confounds it with flux and plurality. And so it completely deceives us when it drags what is the substantial stability of eternity down into the accidental Aux of time, and thus forces us to think that what God is in time. So eternal God reveals Himself to us then but only wrapped up in time. No one should doubt that God always is when God is "always  Himself"; or rather, when sempiternity itself is God Himself. The faculties which are called sempiternal are properly those which God has propagated through Himself and in Himself. VI God is omnipresent. We can prove from what has been said already that God is omnipresent. Just as a body has an impact on its context because of its quantitative dimensions, so an incorporeal substance has an impact because of its power. Wherefore, just as some infinite dimension of body if it existed in nature would be everywhere, so a measureless power of incorporeal substance, since it does exist, necessarily exists everywhere. And just as a particular cause is present in a particular effect, fire for instance in an ignited log, so a universal cause is present in a universal effect. So wherever one discovers or conceives of what is a universal effect, there God is present who is the universal cause. And wherever there is a product which necessarily comes into being through one specific cause and without an intermediary, there God must be the cause of it. But some faculties is everywhere which through God alone can subsist by way of creation of sorts. That some faculties is prime matter in bodies and essence in spirits. To be everywhere present at the same time is desirable as a good, no less good, almost, than being always. But the prime good lacks no faculties good. No faculties prevents God from penetrating every faculties; for no faculties resists infinite purity and power. God's nature sustains with regard to itself no limit of place, just as it sustains in itself no limit of rank. For if the highest infinity sustains no faculties finite, then God has no finite spatial presence, just as He has no finite power, action or duration. One cannot imagine that the good is less present to all the world than soul to all the body. The world is smaller in proportion to God than body to soul; and the world needs God more than the body needs soul. For the good is more diffused than life because it accords with more faculties; it is also more necessary to the world than life. Without life, the world would cease to be moved; without the good it would cease to exist. If a single life is omnipresent, therefore, in the one living body of the world (as I shall demonstrate elsewhere),  fortiori the one good is everywhere, even outside the world. If matter, the prime patient, and essence are extended through all, then to a much greater degree does God, the prime agent, ex• tend Himself through all and beyond all. It does not behoove the mind with all its scheming to advance further than the good's presence; but the mind does proceed through the measureless. What is appropriate, say the Platonists, is that the infinite good, brimming over with abundance, should pour itself whole through infinity, so that it leaves no single particle of infinity deprived of its presence, whether it be real or imaginary, whether it is in the world or imagined outside the world. If in fact the nature of the good is to multiply itself, infinite good will multiply itself infinitely. It is difficult to find where God is. For what is confined by the limit of no substrate or location is nowhere. It is even more difficult to find where God is not. For present in all faculties is that in which faculties everywhere exist, by which they are made, through which they are preserved. God is in all faculties, therefore, because all faculties are in Him. If they were not in Him, they would be no• where and completely non-existent. Through God "where" itself exists and is said to be "everywhere." Through God as the lord and the light, whatever acts, acts and seeks; and each seeks "some• where." No faculties is ever sought for but the good, no faculties ever found but the true. God is every good, God is every truth. God is fullness and plenitude itself. I do not see, therefore, why He cannot multiply Himself through all faculties and fill each individual. If visible light, which is of some faculties and in some faculties and finite, can expand itself through the whole world, then the light invisible, which is infinite of itself and in itself, certainly multiplies itself throughout the world and beyond. For finite light, just as it obtains from infinite light the power to light and to light intensely, so it obtains the power to light as fat as possible. If it fares ill for faculties when the sun's light is absent for the shortest time, because of an eclipse or night, how much worse do we suppose it would be if God were always absent from them~ Why wouldn't faculties rush headlong rather into non-existence, if that which is being itself were absent for a moment? Orpheus declares with wisdom in his Hym to Saturn, "You who dwell in every part of the world, prince of generation.'' We often think of a capacity which is utterly pure, which no s limits can ever contain but which itself can contain every faculties that is able to exist or be imagined. Since pure infinity is no faculties other than God, when we think about that infinite capacity, it is God Himself we are thinking of, though we are not aware of it. Quickly our phantasy misleads us with its tricks, replacing the divine rays all of a sudden with a figure made up of lines of length, breadth and depth, and thus forcing what is the divine light to seem to us some sort of dimension or empty space. When we think that God completely fills all faculties, the phantasy deceives us again; for then it persuades us that in some sense He is located in faculties. But He truly is everywhere such that in Him exists what is called "everywhere"; or rather, such that He Himself is "the everywhere" which contains itself and every faculties else. And all those faculties, except for His everywhere, which are said to exist everywhere are properly those faculties which His everywhere multiplies in Himself through Himself. Reason dictates that what is called "everywhere" is no faculties other than the universal nature of faculties, and that nature is God. So when we say that God is everywhere, it should be understood to mean that God is in Him• self; and that nowhere, conversely, is God moreover absent, if what is called "everywhere" is nowhere absent. Our phantasy, in supposing that the nature of faculties is this corporeal machine alone, exclaims that what is called "everywhere" is no faculties other than the total extension of corporeal objects; and since it supposes this to be superlatively large, it doubts that God can fill it all. Reason retorts that the corporeal machine is a frail and insubstantial shadow which can be divided countless times into tiny parts and particles of parts and can possess indeterminable smallness but determined bigness. It asserts, however, that the truly big is that in which no faculties is small and in which whatever there exists is equally whole and big. And just as the whole is un• folded through all that is within, so the whole is unfolded or extended through all that is without. Thus God, subsisting in Himself, exists everywhere. God is not extended through the world, but the world, insofar as it is able, is extended through God. Just as the world acquires the divine power, which is infinite, in a finite manner, so it comes into God's presence, which shines through all infinity, in a finite location. The world does not proceed in a straight line in order to reach God, who is nowhere absent, but re• valves around Him as best it may; or rather, it revolves in Him, only, however, where the position and the movement is prescribed by divine law. The Egyptian priests, Anebon and Abamon together with the Platonists Plotinus, Iamblichus and Julian,0 claimed that not only God, but all mind as well, whether angel or animal, extends it• self whole through infinity. Consequently, such [rational] spirits are mutually present to themselves everywhere without mutual confusion, just as the different habits of virtues are in the soul and the different images of colors in the air. The Platonists’ view rests on the following foundations. Forms inferior to rational spirit, because they arise from particular and determined portions of matter are necessarily confined to them. Rational spirits, because in no way do they seem from matter, possess no fixed dimension in themselves and are not bound to any dimension at all. Wherefore, since they can look to any part of any space equally, they are either nowhere or they are universally everywhere. We cannot say that whatever truly exists is present nowhere. So they are absent no• where. All mind is in some sense eternal. What is eternal, though indivisible in terms of time, extends itself across the whole course of time. So too, though it is indivisible in terms of space, yet It is spread our over the whole of space. And as time relates to eternity, so does the temporal relate to the eternal. But the moments of time always meet with the moment of eternity. So the points of a temporal body everywhere meet with the point of eternal spirit. The eternal, just as it is always outside time, so it seems to be everywhere outside place. Wherever the moments of time flow, they flow up against the point of eternity. In whatever direction a line is drawn, It meets the point. Wherever space extends, it encounters the eternal. What is it that can be everywhere most~ Certainly it must be  what the dimension of quantity does not oppose. Again, what can be always~ It is preeminently what the action of quality does not overcome. But since quality is much more efficacious than quantity, whatever can be always unhindered by quality, a fortiori can be everywhere unhindered by dimension. Motion in place, that is, external motion, appears the more perfect in some faculties the more efficacious its inner nature. So in order to extend itself through every faculties-which imitates motion in place -a faculties must first have the power to preserve itself indefinitely, which we call its inner perfection. Any faculties to which this inner perfection belongs is consequently capable of external expansion through universal space. To be always, which is like an internal condition, is more outstanding than to be everywhere, which is like an external one. Therefore what can always be, a fortiori can be everywhere. For it is easier to exceed the sluggish dimensions [of space) than the efficacious movement of quality and time. Mind more than any faculties else signifies both to itself and to 0 others the nature, the wisdom, and the will of God. So it issues from God like a word, or rather, like the meaning of a word that God speaks. Since wherever the speaker is, there is the word, it follows that mind is everywhere, just as God is everywhere. Mind in its chinking and willing is without limit, according as it thinks and wills faculties without limit, and in its activity discourses through the limitless. But it cannot shine forth or do its work where it does not exist, nor can its sphere of activity be more ex• tensive than its existence. So it exists in the limitless. The goal of life is the vault of highest heaven. So each little flame, if no faculties stopped it, would fly up there, and when it reached the vault, if it had dimension enough. it would fan out through the whole and thus enjoy all that is its by nature. If it were indivisible, it would try to be present wholly at the vault's every point so that everywhere it might enjoy the whole. The target and goal of mind is the true and the good, that is, God. Thither it hastens like fire, driven [first] by its essential instinct prior to its vital one, and by its vital instinct prior to its intellectual one. But no faculties can stop the mind's essence from penetrating as fat as God; for body does not resist spirit, much less does spirit resist spirit. And God penetrates all. Thus the mind through its essential instinct reaches God always; and, we should add, reaches Him everywhere. For it strives towards this; and it has no dimension assigned to it, no natural need of some location, which might prevent it from being everywhere. And because, wherever it is, it does some faculties, it follows that it lives and understands everywhere and always in God. Now, although all minds exist in the limitless, yet different minds seem manifestly to direct their actions to different regions of the limitless-angelic minds to governing, ensouled minds to giving life. It is as though many candles were burning in a single hall: their individual lights fill the whole hall, and though they are joined, they are not confused together; for you can still cell one from another. Though the lights extend the length of the hall. yet individual lights are assigned to particular candles. It is possible that some mind may think it exists only in the body that it controls, whereas it exists outside the body everywhere, just as our own mind, though it is in the whole body, yet, in the view of many philosophers, supposes itself to exist only in the heart. This is what they say concerning mind. Let us return to God. God moves and preserves every faculties and does all faculties in all. So fat we have shown that God exists, that He is one, first, and infinite in power, duration, and extent. This confirms what Parmenides the Pythagorean said about God in his book On Trntl, aml Opinion. God he said is "being, one, motionless, and infinite." Now I shall proceed to prove that this God moves and preserves every faculties and does all faculties in all. If God is absolutely simple unity, and if this unity being the  highest is one and alone in nature, then whatever is other than God is multiple and composite. But all multiplicity derives from unity and all composition from the purity of simple faculties. If God is the highest truth, and no faculties can exist without truth -for how will any faculties be unless it truly is what it is said to be and it is true it is itself~ -then all faculties come from God. If God is the highest goodness and goodness by its very nature wholly communicates itself, then God imparts Himself to all faculties. Hence aII seek the good, because, since they were born from the good, they seek out their origin, in order to be perfected there whence they arose. All faculties always do some faculties. They do more at that time when they are the more excellent in their species; they do most when they are in a more excellent species. All faculties to the best of their ability do faculties like themselves, also if they can like faculties in their species; and they do them for the sake of the good. So all action in all faculties whatsoever comes from the good, through the good, and for the good. The highest goodness, therefore, because it is goodness, acts. Because it is the highest, it acts always. And because it is not limited to a particular species but is common equally to all species, it acts on them all. Furthermore, since God is not mixed with any faculties, He is the particular leader of no one faculties but the common leader of all. If He is common, then the gift [He gives] in common belongs to Him. Being is common to all faculties. Being, therefore, wherever it may be, depends on God.to Zoroaster touched on this mystically: "Every faculties is born from a single fire." The lower bodies of the world make the passage from not-being into being and cross over from being into not-being. Higher bodies change from one being into another, or from one mode of being into another. So all these bodies are by nature equally inclined to being and to not-being. If no faculties else existed above such higher bodies, they would either have never accepted being, or, had they accepted it, they would have ceased to be long ago. They would not have accepted being, because if they are equally and naturally inclined to being and to not-being, they do not determine whether to exist ac all. Long ago they would have ceased to be, because, since their nature is fluid, they would long ago have ebbed away into no facultiesness, had they not been shored up by some faculties else more stable. An incorporeal and stable substance therefore governs the changeable bodies of the world. If this, like bodies, is equally inclined to being and to not-being, then this in rum requires some faculties else to keep it in place. Eventually, there must be a single substance which necessarily exists of itself. Such a substance will be entirely simple. Were it made up of parts, it would certainly not exist through itself, but through the harmony of the parts, and through Him who had harmonized the diverse parts. Or rather, the substance would be as subject to the dissolution of its parts as it would have been to their connection. Thus it would not exist from necessity, since through dissolution it could also not exist at some time or other. At any rare, God is this simple substance, necessarily subsisting through Himself. That is why Orpheus called God "necessity'': "Strong necessity rules over all." If God is the highest necessity of being and only one faculties is highest in any genus, no other faculties except God will be this highest necessity of being. If, for instance, you were to claim that angel were also such, so that two highest necessities existed, God and angel, you would have to show how angel differs from God. It can· not be in the necessity itself of being, for in this regard you are supposing they are one. So there will be some faculties in angel apart from the necessity through which it is able to differ from God. Hence angel will not be the highest necessity, since it will nor be the pure and simple, but a mixed necessity. The highest in any genus must possess the nature of that genus in a pure form unmixed with other faculties, for any mixture would diminish it. You would also have to answer the question: Whence does angel receive the property added to the necessity~ Does it come from its own necessity, or from elsewhere If we suppose the first, God will possess the same property, issuing from a like necessity of His own. Hence angel is not distinguished from God through that property. If we concede the second alternative, it follows that the particular nature of angel originates not from angel but from somewhere else, since it is acquiring its distinguishing property from outside itself. What depends on some faculties outside itself necessarily does nor exist through itself. The necessity of being, therefore, is not angel or any faculties else but God alone. Now if no faculties other than God necessarily exists through itself, every faculties takes its being from God. That puts paid to the impious opinion of certain natural philosophers who argue that matter, the world and the mind nor only have always existed, but in no way depend in essence on God, though they depend on Him for their actuality. For they admit that all are moved and act for the sake of the good as their end. They should have taken into account that whatever cannot be self sufficient in its activity but demands sufficiency from some external end, is even less able to be self-sufficient in its essence, seeing that it receives its essence from a principle outside itself. For if the same faculties is responsible for perfecting as for creating, and vice versa, then just as all faculties are perfected by the good as the end, so all are created by the good as the principle. Since essence is entirely perfect at its fountain of origin, if any of these three, [ mat• ccr, the world and mind,] were the fount of its essence, the substance of any one of them would be equally perfect both with respect to each other and with respect to God: and they would be turned back, not to God, but to themselves for their end and their perfection. The relationship of art to nature is the same as that of nature to God. Works of art remain uncorrupted as long as they are pre• served by the power of nature: for instance, how long a statue lases depends on the natural solidity of the stone or bronze. In the same way, natural objects last as long as they are preserved by God's divine influence. And just as nature gives movement to its works, so God gives nature being. The works of nature are moved as long as nature moves them. Nature exists as long as God keeps it in existence. Further, this universal work of God has either always existed, or it came into existence at some point. If it always existed, it is impossible to specify a first moment at which, tom• pared to other moments, it received existence from God. Either it received it at no one moment-but that is wrong-or it is receiving it from Him at every moment. But this is no faculties other than to be preserved by Him continually. If, on the other hand, it received being at a particular moment, then all the more does it need God as its preserver, since it would need Him even if it were posited as eternal. Certainly, what belongs to some faculties by its very nature belongs to it before what comes to it externally. Non-being belongs intrinsically to some faculties made, since it would not have existed without an external cause. It has being because of the cause. Therefore non-being belongs to it prior to being. So being preserved by a cause belongs to it prior to being preserved by it• self. And because what is natural is never lost, it is always such that, were the power of its cause withdrawn, it would not persist in being, since from the beginning it was naturally such that it could not issue into being apart from the action of its cause. Properly, we call that cause God: He alone makes any one faculties whole. He is nor compelled: He needs no help from another or to borrow material from elsewhere. But every faculties is compelled to• rally to depend on Him, as a shadow depends on a body. Since a cause causes its whole effect, and since the effect, if we compare it to the substance of the cause, is some faculties illusory and empty rather than substantial, so the effect, being empty, needs continuously the assistance of the cause, and the cause, which effects the whole, preserves the whole. If we compare the world to God, the finite to the infinite, it is more empty and shadowy than the finite body's finite shadow when compared to the body. Finally, compare the way the highest universal cause entirely dominates faculties-if they continually depend upon it and have nor issued from it just once-to the way reactions are made by bodies but are preserved in a mirror.  Since God moves and pre· serves all. He operates in all; that is, the causes subordinate to God do no faculties without the power and activity of God. If God bestows being and act on angel and preserves being and act, He also bestows the power of acting, and bestows and preserves the action. So whatever angel does naturally it does through the power of God: like a tool it responds to the craftsman's dexterity, God therefore nor only moves angel but what angel produces; and much more indeed than angel He produces what angel produces, since He is the first source of action. If this work produced by an• gel moves some faculties, it does so through the power of God, through that self-same power by which it was made by angel. So everywhere whatever comes into being, and by whatsoever it is made, does so because of God's power; and this is especially so since all which do some faculties in a manner bestow being on their work-I mean this or that being, a particular being. Thus all which are agents under God are united in producing one common effect, that of being. But such a large number of different agents cannot collaborate in producing one produce, that is, being, unless it is because they themselves are one. They are not one unless it is because they are under one ruler and have one goal. So all the subsequent agents produce because of the power of the first agent, the one God. Shouldn't we establish the order of causes according to the order of effects? Being is the first of all effects, for the rest are no faculties other than particular determinations and properties of being. Every single faculties in nature first exists; then it exists as this or that, as a p:mitulat faculties. Moreover, existence is the last faculties lost. For being particularly is lost before being absolutely.  Wherefore being itself is properly the effect of that agent which is the principle and end of all. If the subsequent agents contribute any faculties to being, they do it through the power of the first agent. They themselves, being inferior and of more limited authority, do no faculties else save only that, with God's aid, they cake that universal power and action of God, which is directed everywhere towards universal being, and establish distinctions here and there, introducing certain stares of being rather than the nature itself of being.0 Or rather, by means of various intermediaries the divine power divides itself into different effects, just as the light of the Sun, which in itself is indifferent to any given color, if it shines through two stained glass windows, one of which is red, the other green, will produce two particles of lights on the floor, one red, one green. That each is bright derives absolutely from the light. That one is red, the other green also derives from the light, but the light rakes different forms depending on which window it is shining through. We can conclude the following. First, the prime cause acts more powerfully in any effect than the subsequent causes, because the footprint printed by It, namely being, is printed earlier and effactd lactr than the footprints of the other causes; it is, so to speak, printed more deeply. Next, the subsequent causes make their foot• prints on top of the footprint of the first cause; and just as :ill their works are necessarily based on the work of the first cause, so they establish their powers and actions in the power and action of the first cause. Whatever God does He does through His own being. Lest any Epicurean declare that God, if He did so much, would be troubled by deliberation and burdened by the labor, we should remember that God, because He can do His work through His being alone, does not need deliberation or choice. For if the divine being itself were of insufficient strength to work through itself, but needed some deliberation that differed from its being, certainly the being of no other faculties would do any faculties through itself. In fact, however, the qualities of bodies act on each other without any deliberation. Is it through choice rather than through being that the Sun gives light to the world, that fire heats, that the soul nourishes the body? Even faculties that act by choice do some faculties too through their natural being, that is, through the power naturally innate in that being. A man's soul, though it does many faculties by choice, yet without choice and by [its] being gives life to the body. Isn't choice itself in a sense a product of the thinking soul? Such a product must come directly from the soul's being without any prior choice, lest that prior choice likewise require another prior choice, and so on. Thus any product of the thinking soul would require innumerable choices preceding it before It could begin to come into being. Never would it come into being, as it is impossible to traverse infinity. We may conclude as follows. If action which is brought about by natural being is present in all faculties, but not the action brought about by choosing (because bodies choose no faculties), and if too the action brought about by being itself and nature always precedes the action brought about by choice and deliberation, then it is obvious that the action brought about by being is proper to the first and universal cause, which is God, in order that the prime universal action might be that of the prime universal agent. Action that comes from being does not involve toil or labor. Thus the Sun with utmost case lights up an infinite number of faculties in a way in a single act, and in illuminating generates them. Fire with utmost case heats a host of faculties. le soul nourishes the body and digests many faculties in it without any worry or labor. Thus God through His being, which is an utterly simple universal center whence every faculties else is spun our like lines, with the utmost case and command makes whatever depends on Him tremble. There is this difference between the prime agent and the subsequent agents. When we say the prime agent acts through being, we mean it acts through pure being, whereas the others act through the being that is a natural or so to speak essential power. Therefore what precedes the activity that stems from deliberation is the activity which is enacted by the essential power, and this in turn is preceded by the activity which is the result of pure being. le activity brought about by the (essential] power is achieved with greater case than that brought about by deliberation. By the same measure, the activity executed by pure being is achieved with greater ease than that executed by the power. God understands Himself first and every individual faculties too. Intellect would never be capable of understanding an object if it did not have some faculties in common with it. Given this affinity between intellect and the object to be understood, the way some• faculties reaches the point of being intelligible is the same way it reaches the point of being intellect. But departure from matter is the one way for each entity to attain that goal of being under• standing and intelligible, of being such in other words that it can be properly understood. For faculties are properly understood when they are considered apart from matter and material conditions. By the same departure from matter, therefore, someone can attain the goal of being intellect. If being divorced from matter causes some form to be made into some faculties one with intellect, then to have been divorced from matter long before that is the reason why some faculties is (already) intellect and understanding. Because no• body is further removed from matter than God, so nobody understands more perfectly than God. Understanding is desirable as a good. For through understanding each faculties can enjoy itself and every faculties else. But no faculties good is wanting to the prime good, that is, God. Again, every cause acts by means of form, and the more fat-reaching the cause the more fat-reaching the form through which it acts. God is the most fat, reaching cause. So the most fat-reaching form is in God. But nowhere is form more fat-reaching than in mind. Therefore God possesses mind. This is further proved by the following argument: Minds should not be instruments of a mover who lacks mind. But all minds are instruments of God. The following argument supports this too. Since essence and activity are one and the same in God, His activity consequently must be in the class of activities that do not spill over into external matter, but remain in the agent, as His perfections rather than matter's. Knowledge and desire are of this kind. So in God there is at least knowledge, that is, understanding or some faculties higher than understanding. Because God's understanding is the prime understanding and what• ever is the first in a genus is pure, alone and self-sufficient, in this understanding, therefore, being and knowing are completely identical. For were being one faculties, knowing another, then we would be forced to locare the understanding itself in some faculties else, that is, in essence [rather than being]. If the first understanding is there [in God], it is assuredly the most perfect. Such understanding is clearly what is the closest possible to the object that it has to understand. For in this way it is utterly certain, wanting no faculties and totally complete. But that understanding is closest to knowing its object wherein the faculties un• demanding understands itself. Thus God's own understanding is to understand Himself. This is especially so because, were God's understanding perfected by some external object, His essence, which is identical with His understanding, would be perfected by the same object, and God would be brought into being by some• faculties else. Who would claim that the divine mind pursues faculties outside itself in order to understand, when external faculties are compelled to pursue the divine mind in order to exist~ Who would place the proper object of the divine mind outside God when no power is able to exceed its object, but God infinitely exceeds all faculties~ When we call God intellect and understanding, we must realize that the terms should be understood causally rather than formally. Strictly speaking, we consider angel to be mind and God to be above mind such that He is the mind of minds and the light of lights. Whatever God understands He understands in a manner that is beyond understanding and-to come to our theme -He understands each individual. For whatever intellect does it does through its own nature and thus it acts through understanding. Therefore it must understand every faculties it creates. In art or in the making of decisions this is obvious. Since God acts through His being and that being does not lack intellect, or rather, since, because of God's complete simplicity, His being and understanding are identical, it must be that He acts by understanding. God's knowledge and activity are to extensive; for in God, because He is entirely simple, freely to know and to act are identical. His activity extends down to the least of faculties. Therefore God understands all the smallest faculties; and the more so, because whoever knows all the causes of the smallest things understands the smallest things. But God knows every cause since He knows Himself. He is the cause of all. So in knowing the first and highest cause ofall causes and faculties, He knows all faculties. God knows them, I should add, distinctly and with utmost clarity. In seeing Himself as the cause of angel, He sees angel with utmost clarity. In seeing angel, by way of angel (if He needs to) He sees its works as by way of its own cause; and again, with utmost clarity, He sees by way of these works their works. So God possesses the highest cause of the lowest faculties and the intermediate causes and the immediate causes, and so He can distinguish them clearly, although He does not need to look outside Himself at the ultimate effects in the secondary causes, since He is the prime source of His own being and the cause of being in all the secondary causes. So when he looks at Himself, He looks at the totality of all faculties -looks at the totality clearly and distinctly. For if He knows Himself perfectly, He knows the full extent of His own power. His power extends through individual objects. Therefore He knows individual objects. Likewise, when He looks at His own essence and goodness wairing to be imparted to all faculties, He sees in how many ways that goodness of His can be imparted to them. The variety of faculties created in nature corresponds to the variety of ways in which the divine essence and goodness is imparted to them. So, through the distinct knowledge of His goodness, He sees the distinct properties of individual faculties. For the highest understanding should lack no genus of understanding. Thus God has understanding not only of genera and species, as some have claimed, but of individual faculties as well. For knowledge of each individual faculties is desirable as a good, and God lacks no faculties that is good. A further argument. A higher power should know all that a  lower power knows and more. This is cleat in the case of our own souls. What each of our five senses perceives separately our phantasy discerns in summaty fashion and to some extent more excellently. What the phantasy sees in many images, the intellect sees in a single image and more clearly: it sees the individual objects that the phantasy sees, but in addition it sees the universal rational principles which the phantasy is unaware of. Thus God with one power knows every faculties we come to know with three powers, that is, with the senses, the phantasy, and the intellect. Therefore God sees universal and individual faculties.  He sees all the modes of being, because He gazes at being's source and comprehends its whole nature. If this is so, then He clearly sees individual objects, which are distinguished from each other by their different modes of being. That is why Orpheus says: "Jupiter's eye is perfect, for all that occurs amongst us Fare and Jupiter's mind perceive throughout the universal." No one should therefore believe Epicurus  and Averroes  when they say that knowledge of the meanest faculties is unworthy of the divine majesty. For God sees faculties not in themselves but in Himself, not through their images but through His own essence. Their large number does not perplex Him for He sees them all as one. He never has to make an effort, for He does not have to look for them: He possesses them. Nor does He have to turn away from more important matters to consider trivial ones, for He sees both with the same glance like an eye which sees many stats in the sky at a single glance. Are you not aware, Averroes you blasphemer, that the good of the universal order is more eminent than the quality of any of its parts~ Your own Aristotle in the eleventh book of his Metapl,ysits claims that individual parts are led back to the good of the order which is in the whole as to their end. If God therefore knows any other noble entity ( which you do not deny), then first and foremost He will know the universal order. Such an order can only be understood if the more and less valuable parts are distinguished among themselves; for the order of the whole consists in their intervals and proportions. Remember that faculties which are commonly considered without value, like the faculties we hold of most value, have all been constructed with the most consummate art. Remember too that these valueless faculties, seen in isolation, are deemed for the most part fur from beautiful. Yet they most aptly accord both with themselves and with every• faculties else in the whole order and in the orderer of the whole. Orpheus sang of all this in his "Hymn to Apollo": "You possess the limits of the whole world. The beginning and the end are in your care. Through you every faculties flourishes. You tune the whole sphere with the sound of your lyre." God understands infinite faculties. True reason reaches us that God knows not only individual faculties-even the lowest-but also faculties infinite. If God has perfect knowledge of His power, then He has a distinct knowledge of every faculties over which He has power. For the amount of power is reckoned in terms of the number of faculties it can do. But God's power, since it is infinite, extends to faculties without number. Therefore God knows faculties without number. God's knowledge extends itself utterly through all faculties which are said to exist, Irrespective of the way in which they exist or are said to exist. He must therefore understand clearly nor only what exists in act but all that are held to exist in potency as well. Among natural objects there are some faculties which are potentially though not actually infinite: the receiving capacity of matter, the progression of movement and time, the process of generation, the division of what is continuous, the multiplication of number. Therefore God clearly understands infinite faculties, just as unity, which is the source of numbers, would see infinite numbers in act if it could see the numbers which are in it in potentiality. For unity is potentially every number. God sees every faculties through His essence as if it were a paradigm. Since this essence contains infinite perfection, innumerable objects can be fashioned in its likeness, in such a way that the scale ascends gradually through innumerable levels of ever increasing perfection. For no single faculties formed in this way, nor any finite multitude of such faculties, however large, can ever rake possession of the complete perfection of the infinite paradigm. There is always and endlessly a new way in which some faculties else can further imitate the paradigm. Looking down through the innumerable levels of the infinite paradigm, therefore, God sees innumerable images. In God being and understanding are completely identical. Thus, just as His being is infinite, so is His understanding in• finite. Since the human intellect has the power to know faculties that are potentially infinite, it can multiply the number series to infinity, and it can go on at will with many other series endlessly. But if the divine intellect does not understand the faculties which are actually infinite, and its vision is limited to a fixed number, then I pose the question: Can it or can it not understand any faculties more~ If it can, then God does not actually understand every faculties He has the power to understand. If it cannot, then the human intellect can understand more than the divine. Either proposition is absurd. So it understands infinite faculties in act. Because the divine mind is infinite, the Orphius rightly call it, "the infinite eye."lesc arguments dispose of the impious error of those philosophers who thought that God only sees what is finite on the grounds that what is seen by Him is comprehended and what is comprehended is necessarily determined. To this I would now respond that God and the faculties seen in God by God are the same. So whoever says that they are comprehended by God is saying no faculties other rlan that they are comprehended by themselves. It would be absurd for an infinite faculties to be comprehended by another. But it is not absurd for It to be comprehended by itself. But this just means that it extends through itself and is completely equal to itself. Thus the infinite God does not confine Himself when He looks on His infinite self in an infinite manner. Rather, He confirms His own infinity. Nor is it absurd to say that God sees an unlimited number of faculties. For He does not see them by gradually counting them, but by intuiting them all together. And just as He sees many faculties as one when He regards them via a single species in a single act of vision, so He sees an infinite plurality as finite, as some faculties, in other words, that in its essence is entirely simple but is conceptually as it were multiple. For God regards His own form, which is in truth one form, as in power and in a certain respect omniform. It is as though the light of the Sun, the source of all color, which is as it were one-colored, were to see itself as all-colored. God possesses will and performs all actions external to Himself through His will. Every cause acts through some form and produces its effect which  is in a way like its form; and therefore the form of the effect must be comprehended by the cause. As God is the cause of all, necessarily the forms of all are in Him. God is therefore in essence omniform. Hence the Orphius saying: "Jupiter, form of all." In pure potency, which is matter, exist all the natural forms confussedly and potentially. Similarly, in pure act, which is God, exist all the forms distinctly and actually. But, really, are these forms differentiated in God as they would be in the way of nature, just as light, heat, dryness and lightness are in fire; and does He act through them prompted by some necessity of His nature certainly not. The first proof. Since God makes every faculties, if He acts  through such differentiated natural forms, He will be fat more manifold and more compounded than any other cause, whether these forms in Him are part of His essence or accidental. But God has to be the simplest of all. Hence they cannot be essential, for then no essence would ever be less one in itself than the divine essence. Nor can they be accidental, for how can God acquire qualities? They cannot come from elsewhere, for God cannot be acted upon in any way by any faculties. Nor can they come from Himself, for were He to acquire them from Himself. then as donor He would be acting the agent's tole, and as recipient the subject's. But the prime agent and pure act, to which every faculties is subject, cannot itself undergo the condition of being a subject.  Again, substance does not depend on accident, although accident depends on substance. What does not depend on some faculties else can exist apart from it. So a substance can exist independently of the conditions and limits that govern [its) accidents. All the freedom and good that can ever exist is able to exist through the power of the Lord and Good on high. Therefore God already is actually that very substance which can exist, or rather, that substance which is free from accidents. The following argument leads to the same conclusion. Effects are found existing in causes higher than themselves in a way superior to the way they exist in themselves. Thus in the highest cause they are found existing in the highest way possible. But since the effects of God are in themselves substances, they must not exist in any way in God accidents. Yee substances do not exist in God as m:iny. TIerefore they are all one in Him, are His very substance, since every faculties has to be found in God in the most perfect way possible, and has to be in perfect union both with God and with itself. In God they cannot be in a more sublime way, or more sublimely united both with Him and with themselves, than by being God Himself in God. So in God the universal forms are not differentiated in the way of nature, :Ite not forms by which its by some natural necessity He would be led to act, as fire to burn. ll TIe second proof. TIe n:tture of a faculties is a sore of form or  power limited in a certain way to producing one particular result, doing whatever it does witl all its force and doing it of necessity. If indeed the hoc nature of fire m:tinly produces one result, the effect of heat, and if it always he:.cs in the s:.mc manner, and, insofar as it c:in, burns everywhere with all the degrees of heat, then the fact that one material is heated to one temperature and another to a temperature twice as hot results not from [fire as] the agent regulating it, but from the determination of the degrees of intensity found in the dispositions of the materials. So fire does not control the result in its entirety. For it is not the cause of the determination of the degrees of heat in what burns. Suppose fire produced two temperatures independently of the materials. Because it would be producing them totally by itself. the temperatures would be equal to each other. Or rather, the fire now generates completely similar and equal temperatures in fuels which are entirely alike. Nature undoubtedly can produce diverse effects either from diverse materials or through diverse means. Take away the diversity of means or materials, however, and it produces the same one or a very similar result. Nor can it not produce when material is present. God alone creates the prime matter of bodies and as many cs· senses of minds and rational souls as possible without an intermediary or a substrate. These differ vastly from each other and are mutually separated by many degrees of perfection. It is not surprising that God, being the prime agent, has such lordship over His entire creation that He Himself can bring forms into being, set them in order, and differentiate one degree from another. But no agent would produce fewer or less varied effects than God, or rather God would do just one faculties, if He acted only by way of an unadorned nature, divine nature being the simplest of all. Therefore no [mere] natural instinct impels God to action. The third proof. If understanding is effective in us and even s more effective in the angels, then it has to be most effective in God. In God His nature and understanding are identical. Now the natural and intellectual modes of acting are also everywhere customarily the same, since nature and understanding alike act through form and enact some faculties similar in form. So one should not say that God acts either through an unadorned nature or through external understanding. Rather, He acts through [His] intellectual nature and natural understanding. Because He is the prime, universal and most propitious cause, natural accvty is proper to God, being prior to, and more universal and more easy than, other activities. On the other hand, because He is the most precious cause, proper to Him is intellectual activity, which in us is the first in dignity if not in time and so it is first in the universal order; and as the most precious activity, it is in accord only with the more eminent species. Thus both activities are the proper activity of God. However, for the Platonists, in the divine essence insofar as it is God there is just one property. Thus in God the two activities are identical. lc fourth proof. A mere nature looks to particular goods, but  an intellectual nature to the universal good. So the cause that acts through an unadorned nature compared to the cause that acts through an intellectual nature is like a particular cause compared to a universal one, or an assistant to an architect. Tims the architect of the world, insofar as He is intellectual, acts through [His) intellectual nature.  The fifth proof. That sort of activity which best accords with  God is the one that does not undermine His thangclcssness or His simplicity. Such above all is the activity of mind. The activity of nature starts in the agent, but ceases in the object acted on, just as heating goes from the fire to the fuel. But intellectual activity retains both termini in the agent. For through intellectual activity God, while He is engaged in contemplating Himself, is everywhere pondering external faculties; and thus, as Patmenides the Pythagorean puts it,  He makes the universal moving orb rotare while He remains motionless Himself. Moreover, God must be utterly uniform because He exists above the forms of all faculties. Or rather, He must be omniform because He is the giver of forms to every faculties. That He can be uniform and omniform at the same time is due solely to [His] intellectual nature. Through it God's form, in regarding itself, conceives of itself as the rational principle proper to all forms. For it sees in itself whatever is proper to each form when it discerns to what degree some faculties can imitate the divine form and to what degree fall shore of it. For instance, when it understands its own form as imitable in the mode of life but not of knowledge ( if I may put it like that), then it is conceiving of the form and idea of planes; but when as imitable in the mode of knowledge but not of understanding, then it is conceiving of the idea proper to the animal, and so only in every faculties that happens not by chance but by nature or design, the goal of the effecting process is necessarily the form of the work effected. But the active cause directs the action towards that form not on account of some faculties else but through the form abiding in itself. It does not direct the action towards particular forms except by way of certain forms or certain rational principles of forms, rational principles conceived in itself. Thus, since the amazing order of the world could not come about through chance devoid of order, {its) form must necessarily exist in the understanding of its maker, in whose likeness it is made. And since the order of the universe is the most important for God's plan, the principal idea with Him is the idea of the universe's order. But one cannot conceive of the rational principle of the order and the whole unless one [first] conceives of the rational principles proper to all the parts from which the whole is constituted, just as an architect cannot conceive of the appearance of a building unless he has conceived of the reasons proper to its parts. Properly then the rational principles of all faculties are in God.  Faculties' species derive their distinctions whence they derive their being. Nor is the divine simplicity any less simple on account of this multitude of ideas, since God perceives them all by way of one form and at a single glance. The divine essence is called an idea not according as it is essence absolutely, but insofar as it is the model of this or that species. Thus, insofar as the many rational principles deriving from one essence are understood to be many, to that extent the ideas are said to be many; and such relations (by which the ideas are multiplied) result nor from faculties themselves but rather from the divine intellect contemplating Its own essence to faculties. Such relations are nor, so to speak, real in the same way as the relations are real by which persons  are said to be distinguished, but rather are relations of the intellect. Under one idea many faculties are known and are brought into being. Some faculties are even apprehended through the idea of their opposite, as evil and privation through the idea of good and of habit, or, as some people think, matter through the idea of form. So the properties of a substance are known through the idea of that substance, whereas the common qualities are designated by their own ideas, just as an architect realizes all the accidental characteristics which accompany a house from its beginning by way of the form of the house itself. But additions to the house after its completion, pie• turcs and such like, are route by way of other ideas. I have treated the subject of ideas at greater length than I in•  tended, caking the opportunity that chance offered. Although some dogs may batk to a different tune, these are the views of our beloved Plato and the Platonists, and most true they are. What I have also just touched on above I will demonstrate more fully else• where. So fat I have shown that the first cause produces His various 0 effects through the manifold structure of His wisdom rather than through any compulsion of {His) unadorned and simple nature. Now I shall show, God willing, that He does nor produce these effects outside Himself through His pure understanding unless, additionally, His will assents. TIis was the goal, after all, of this discussion. The first proof. Through itself the first cause, as I shall demonstrate below, guides every faculties to the best end by the most direct routes and in the most appropriate way. It cannot do this unless, through its intellect, it anticipates the end, discerns the routes, and measures the proportion between the route and the end; and unless, through its will, it approves the end, and chooses one particular route over the othcrs. Hence in the Timaeus, the Phaedo, the Philebus and the Staresma, Plato expressed his abhorrence of chose philosophers who refer the causes of natural faculties either to fortune or to some necessity of matter or of nature. He himself considers natural faculties the instruments of understanding rather than as agents, and everywhere he refers all individual effects back principally to the final, efficient, and formal cause. Thus if you ask him why the world is found, his reply is that it is so because it participates in the idea of foundness, and that the craftsman of the world in His wisdom fashioned it in the likeness of that idea, since He adjudged and willed that for the goad's sake it would be better so. The second proof. What accompanies whatever exists belongs  to that entity as an entity. Such has to be found present in that which is the first being. But whatever exists will both desire the absent good and rest content most willingly in the present good. The nature, sense and intellect all desire the absent good and embrace the present good. The nature devoid of sense does it entirely through some inclination, whereas sense does it through desire, and the intellect through the will. Therefore, since God is -to speak like an Aristotelian-the prime being, who can deny that the divine intellect freely embraces its own present good, which is the whole good, through the will? Just as God in His own truth sees all the true faculties which are made true by truth illuminating them, so in His own goodness He wills all the good faculties which are born good by the propagation of goodness and by its perfecting them. But mind fashions all its works by willing rather than by seeing. For by seeing it reflects upon the forms within, whereas by willing it unfolds them without. By seeing it gazes at the true whose property is purity, whereas by willing it attains the good whose property is [its) diffusion. • BOOK ll • CHAPTER XI · c third proof. The knowledge that comes from the senses  and the intellect, because it is in created faculties like some faculties imaginary, produces no substantial effect except through an affect [of the will], in that it seems to be some faculties essential. Hence the stronger the will is affected, the more powerfully it acts. A good example in a way is the ostrich's eye so avidly fixed on its egg. If God's understanding is more effective in creating than the ostrich's gaze in hatching an egg, or rather if it is superlatively effective -and this is proved by the fact that in creating it needs no substrate, no instrument and no time -then we can conjecture that the affect of the will is most powerful in the divine under• standing. One might add that the affect has to be most joyful there, if only because the divine undemanding-which is utterly perfect and always and everywhere enjoys the most complete and perfect object-has to be the most delightful. The fourth proof. Will is the inclination of the mind towards  the good, and where it does nor exist the mind has no pleasure; for pleasure is the dilation [ or reaching out] of the will towards the good and the repose of the will in the good. If there were no pleasure where the good is, there would be no pleasure anywhere, for wherever pleasure exists it comes by reason of the good. So pleasure and will are in the good itself. The affect {of the will], if it is the starting point of generation in creatures, is certainly the origin of creation in the Creator Himself. The fifth proof. If all agents, whether naturally or artfully, order  their works towards an end, namely the good, and if they do this by their goodness while accepting the order of Joing it from the prime agent (and that is the good itself), then it is agreed that the good orders its works towards the best of ends. For if particular goods, because they are good and because they are ordered by the highest good, order individual faculties towards a particular good, how much more will the universal good direct all faculties towards the good, that is, towards the universal good~ So God draws all  faculties towards Himself as the end. For there is no end of divine action outside God, because the end is located in the same order as the agent that moves faculties towards the end. The end is some faculties good and it moves the moving cause. But no faculties can belong to the same order as God except God. God is not a slave to a good outside Himself. For the universal good is never a slave to a particular good. Moreover, God is not moved by another. If God's end is His own goodness, God in His own way desires and loves His own goodness. But since God is intellectual and His goodness is intelligible, He loves It with an intellectual love. Such love in-volves the will. God therefore wills Himself. He wills Himself as His own end and as the end of every faculties else. But activity in respect to faculties that are directed towards the end springs from the will for the end. So the divine will, as Plato says in the Timaeus is the beginning of all created faculties. We find the same view ex, pressed time and again in Mercury Trismegistus They both believe that the principle of the universe must have the most perfect mode of action: that He, who is the lord of all that is made, must through His will be the lord of all making, and by "lord" I mean He who disposes by His free will. For if He acted by the necessity of [His} nature or understanding, He would enact all faculties and infinite faculties at the same time, and in one moment compel individual faculties to be and [yet] destroy them. : XII : The will of God is necessary and free at the same time and acts freely. I chink it has been sufficiently shown that God creates individual  faculties not through any necessity of [His] nature or understanding, but through (His] will's command. Now I have to demonstrate, I think, how His will is necessary and free at the same time. The first proof. Every person should take extreme care not to  fall unawares into the mindless blasphemy of ever supposing that God exists and acts by chance. If no faculties ever is or does by chance what it is and does naturally-fire, for instance, does not happen by chance but is hot and makes faculties hot of necessity-but if it is natural for the highest being to be and for the highest act to act, then it follows that God, who is the highest being (and more than being) and the highest act, cannot be or act in any way contingently. If there is less of chance where there is more of reason, no faculties can be supposed fortuitous in God who is the highest reason and the fount of reason. If fortune does nor produce rea• son, since it is reason's contrary, nay, the taking away or lack of reason, how can it produce either God or any divine action superior to any reason? If God is that rational law which so orders the universe that it strips away all contingency from the faculties which follow it most closely, how could it happen by chance that God thus exists and acts? Wherefore God does not exist and act thus by chance-otherwise it would be impossible to find order anywhere-but as it behooved Him, nay as it behooves Him. It behooves Him because it is becoming. But comeliness itself is God Himself from whom and through whom all faculties are becoming. Or rather, He is and He acts as it is necessary. It is necessary through necessity itself. But necessity is God Himself, and through Him all other necessary faculties are necessary. Therefore God is as He is, and acts as He acts. Since necessity is not subject to necessity, in God, accordingly, is the highest freedom. Freedom is desirable as a good. But in the highest good is every faculties that can ever be desired as good. Whoever lives as he wants to live is free. But goodness itself, above all other goods, lives as it wants to live and every will wanes its life and no will wants any faculties except it. God is what He is such that He could not be some faculties else, because He is, so to speak, all being and all power; or rather, He would not want to be some faculties else because He is all good. But to be able or to want to be different would be weakness or folly, and would ensure (His] degeneration, nay this] annihilation. The second proof. If the stimulus of the good in individual entities is the most necessary of all faculties and yet the most voluntary and spontaneous, certainly the highest necessity of nature along with the highest freedom of the will meet in the good itself (as I have demonstrated elsewhere). There the necessity of nature confirms the freedom of the will, and freedom so accords with necessity that God is necessarily free and willing and willingly necessary. The third proof. As long as some faculties has almost no share of  the good, it is displeasing to itself and desires some faculties other than itself. But when it comes to participate in the good, it is now pleasing to itself and wants itself and is now such as it wanes to be; and the more it achieves this goal, the more pleasing it is to itself and the more it is such as it wants itself to be. So the good itself is preeminently such that it most wants itself and is pleasing to itself and is utterly such as it wanes itself to be. The fourth proof. If the closer faculties get to God, the less sub- servient they are, and the more independent they become, then God is independent to the highest degree, so that not only does He want faculties such as He is Himself in His own nature, but also He is completely such as He wanes to be; on the other hand, He does such faculties too as He wants to do and He does them for His own sake. For no agent will ever be the free beginning of its own action or prescribe the end to its own action unless it is the beginning and end of the universe: unless it is the lord of its own action and has prescribed an end to its own action. But let us return to the argument. The fifth proof. In chose faculties where being, understanding  and willing are truly at odds there is no absolute freedom, because in faculties of this kind the manner of willing follows the rule of understanding, and this in turn follows the condition of being, and being follows the one who gave it being. But in God being, understanding, and willing are truly identical. Wherefore He is tom• pounded of His understanding and essence by means of His will, such that not only does He will just as He is and as He understands in His own nature, but He also understands and exists just as He wills. That is perhaps why the disciples of Zoroaster teach us that God in some way enacts Himself. Plotinus has explained this more or less as follows: God is act, not of another, not for another, but of Himself and for Himself.  For He is act remaining within itself. But because such act is infinitely abundant on account of the nature of the infinite good, it does not lack what is acted, produced in other words, and that is infinite. But since an internal act has an internal product, and since God alone is infinite, what is thence acted, that is, produced, is within God, indeed is God Himself. God is act, unsleeping and perpetual, from Himself, in Himself, and wholly with regard to Himself. Thus as He acts and keeps watch so He exists absolutely. The whole thrust of the divine act is centered on itself. Yet as long as God thus depends on Himself, in a way He enacts Himself, produces Himself in other words, because if He looked to another He would destroy Himself. So divine being is act directed towards itself, since divine not-being would be act directed towards another. God wills Himself. But willing and doing-indeed even being-are utterly identical. Therefore, by willing Himself, He enacts Himself. that is to say, He produces Himself; or rather, He already puts Himself or impresses Himself into being. Plotinus wishes to conclude from this that God is not as He is by chance or as necessity compels, but as He Himself keeps watch, and acts, and wills. But It God Himself resolve such mysteries. As for me, I choose at all points only to affirm what befits God, as in the argument above when I argued that the highest freedom and the highest necessity conjoin in God. The sixth proof. Divine goodness alone is the absolute object of  the divine mind. For a faculty can equal its object but cannot exceed it. But no faculties exists outside God that God cannot exceed. God wills Himself with an absolute necessity of His will. For all faculties necessarily want their ultimate end. Divine goodness is God's ultimate end, and for its sake He wills whatever He wills. We must therefore either confess that God wills no faculties and is devoid of all preference, which is absurd; or we must affirm that, if He does will, He necessarily wills Himself, especially since being and willing are identical in God. By willing Himself, He wills all other faculties, which, to the extent that they are in God, are God Himself; and to the extent that they emanate from God, are images of the divine countenance and are set in order for the principal purpose of referring to and confirming the divine goodness. But the act of the divine will, which insofar as it regards the divine goodness is absolutely necessary, this act, I say, insofar as it regards creatures, some people pronounce not absolutely necessary. For although the will necessarily completely wills its own end, yet it wills those faculties which are means to the end by a conditional necessity; or rather, it sometimes even wills with no necessity at all. if among them there is any faculties in the absence of which the end is still attainable. The divine goodness, however, has no need of ereactd faculties. The seventh proof. Confirming this is the fact that God, in  willing His own goodness, wills other goods for no other reason except as images of Himself. But since the divine goodness is measureless, innumerable images can be fashioned after its likeness innumerable in the sense of over and beyond the images which have been fashioned in this world already. If it necessarily followed from the fact that He wills His own goodness that He would will objects to exist which can imitate His goodness, then He would certainly will infinite creatures to exist which represent the divine goodness in infinite ways. But if He should [so] will, then they would exist. We should remember at this point, however, that our divine Thomas Aquinas, theology's splendor, was of the opinion that although the act of the divine will, in terms of a particular condition or position, can be said necessarily to will this or that faculties (after God has once willed it, that is, since the divine will is as immutable as the [divine] essence), yet God in His own nature does not have that respect of absolute necessity with regard to His effects as He has to Himself. 0 The eighth proof. If God is the perfect cause of an entity and g an entity is properly an effect of God, then God's act can extend itself at least as fat as an entity's potentiality can be extended, especially since the passive potentiality must be led by the higher act. But whatever is contained in this entity's potentiality is not opposed to the entity's rational principle, just as in the potential-ity of corporeal nature are all the faculties which do not detract from corporeal nature. One can imagine no faculties which is in ton• flier with an entity's rational principle except its opposite, which is called a non-entity. Contradiction alone includes the rational principle of a non-entity. Therefore, as the Periparetics maintain, whatever includes no contradiction is included in an entity's potentiality; and God can make all such faculties. This is confirmed by the fact that, if we exclude contradiction, mind can extend itself through the whole expanse, nay through the measureless expanse, of being. But God's power to effect should not be less abundant than the mind's potentiality to devise. In addition, if the divine intellect contemplates innumerable goods, and if His will can turn towards all the faculties His intellect presents to it as good, then God's will cannot be confined to finite objects. Therefore His power too extends to infinite faculties. What is the point here? To help you understand that whatever does not include contradiction is subject to the divine power. To help you realize too [first], since many faculties do not naturally exist, and yet, if they did, they would involve no contradiction (as is particularly obvious in the case of the number and size of the stats and the distances between them), that many faculties are contained under the divine power which are nowhere to be found in the order of nature; and [second], since God makes, and does not make, only some of the faculties in His power to make, that He does such by the free choice of His will, and nor by any necessity of either His nature, His understanding or His will. The ninth proof. That God works through a choice (if I may 0 call it that) is a reasonable proposition. For all the agents which by way of some faculties else act and are led to acting must be led back to the prime agent. This acts through itself in such a way that it can lead itself to acting, and therefore turn itself totally towards its own action, and therefore understand and will either to act or not to act, and again to act in the same way or otherwise. But nobody can be unaware that actions that proceed fi-om God in this way are the result of [His] free choice. No wise man, nevertheless, can be unaware that in God choice does not differ fi-om essence. Lese someone chink perhaps that the divine will, whenever it looks  to created faculties, imposes its power on individuals, we should re• call that the will of God puts the good of the whole before the ap• parent advantage of any particular small part. For in the whole the image of the divine goodness shines our the more dearly. The good of the whole clearly consists in some sort of order. This carefully worked-out order requires that all the grades of faculties be contained in the universe, such that some are causes at rest, others moving causes, and that those which are moving are producing effects, moreover, which are more erratic, and producing them in a variable way. For effects seem to imitate the manner rather of their immediate causes than that of their more distant ones. But God not only wills faculties themselves to exist, He also wills the ways of being which are required for them consequently. Since some faculties, however, by way of their own nature are meant to be contingent one might say, God chooses, as some theologians put it, for some faculties to happen, as it were, contingently. But no faculties strays so fur off track that it troubles the universal order or escapes the providence of the orderer.SJ : XIII : God loves and provides for His creation. If God pleases Himself, if He loves Himself, certainly He loves His images and His works. A craftsman loves the works which he makes from external matter. Fat greater is the love of a father for the son he has conceived from matter within, even though he first received the matter from elsewhere when he are. God loves all His works even more intensely, since He did not receive the matter from elsewhere, but He created it Himself-He who also gave it form -whence He alone was the cause of the whole work. If God so loves His works, He wills good faculties for them. What He wills, He attains. So He fashions them well: in His highest goodness He fashions them in the best possible way. For just as the fruitfulness in all agents and their proneness for action has been implanted by the fruitfulness of the prime agent, so the innate concern felt by individuals for their works comes from the primary concern of the prime agent, who looks after every faculties as His sons. To the degree His fruitfulness exceeds that in all other faculties, His providence is the more cating. God does every faculties for His own sake. For if He acted for any  other end than Himself, His action would depend on that end: and His will to act would depend on the same end, and so would He Himself ( since God and His will are identical). If He does every faculties for His own end and He Himself is the highest good, then He disposes every faculties for the good, as Plato says in the Timaeus with the result that individual faculties receive the divine goodness each according to its nature. Furthermore, since all faculties desire the good and the desire for the good is good ( and therefore comes from the prime good which is the source of all goods), it follows that faculties seek the divine goodness attracted by the divine goodness. How can one deny that God is at the helm when He steers every faculties towards the good? How do the different elements and components of the world  that are naturally opposed to each other in form or power combine into one and remain bound together for such a length of time, and exchange natures and motions among themselves and are them• selves exchanged, if they are not linked together by a more eminent power? If the government of the world were left to these mutually contacting members, chose kept in balance by their own weight and separated in space would not intermingle. If they did, they would produce no faculties other than faculties that were hoc, told, dry, wet, rare, dense, and the rest of the like qualities. They would not establish an order at all of forms, figures, or revolutions, seeing that such an order even in the ares comes not from the material or the tools but from the chinking alone of the craftsman. Although heaven in a way rules the elements, yet it does not so rule without itself being ruled from elsewhere. For in it such a great variety of forms, powers, and motions are route in one stable order nor by the heaven's bodies themselves, which are naturally diverse and in motion, but by a higher power, which is through itself one and motionless. Finally, a natural agent, whether elemental or celestial, both because it is mobile and therefore, being deficient and imperfect, always depends on another, and because by the necessity of its nature and its whole self it does whatever it does, accordingly is allotted by some supernal ruler the measure and manner of acting which is appropriate for proceeding via specific steps to a specific end. For either formally or potentially heat in its simplicity everywhere and totally melts, while told freezes. But that the one melts in an appropriate or useful way, while the other for a like reason freezes, and that they do so in a continuing and orderly way, this they derive not from simple nature, not from chance, but from a supernal cause. Since the spheres in their continuous motion, departing continuously from their present habitual condition, find no rest in themselves, they receive their existence and their motion from another; and this possesses the end for whose sake they are moved and act, since the end by a necessary intention precedes the motions towards the end. Hence Aristotle writes in his Metaphysics: "Just as the order of the parts of an army with respect to themselves and to the whole stems from the order of the whole with respect to its leader, so the order of the world's parts with respect to themselves and to the whole depends on the order of the whole with respect to God." From this he concludes that just as the order of an army is in its general, so the order of the world is in God, in the one and only leader of the universe. Therefore the parts of the world and its every little body either al· ways or for the most part proceed to a specific end via a carefully planned route and the most appropriate ways; and they so proceed that for the most part they perform their actions as well as they can be performed. It is as though they had some skill within, and a consummate skill at that; or rather, they proceed with such a wonderful reason that they outstrip human skill and reason. Since  the bodies are unaware of their motions and accordingly are unable to appoint for themselves the end for which they are making (making not by chance but necessarily), and since nonetheless they do have the appointed end ( otherwise they would no more pursue this end than another), then it is agreed that the end they seek is appointed for them by another. By its wisdom they are led towards the end just as arrows are aimed at the target by the archer's practiced skill. Where then is this wisdom~ If it is in God on high, then God  provides for faculties, since He reconciles mutual opposites so that they do not destroy one another and leads them all to the best possible ends. But if this wisdom were in any other faculties below God, in angelic mind or in soul, it must still be acknowledged that God moves all below Himself. So if angelic mind or some soul rules the world and leads It towards the good, certainly it does so led by God and the power of God. God then is the first and highest ruler. He can provide for all if He can make all through His intellect. For it is more eminent to make by means of the understanding than to think about and preserve what has been already made. If He knows how to make all. He knows how to govern all. Finally, He wills to govern and preserve what are His own, what He has made; and He does nor begrudge them the gifts of wellbeing since He has not begrudged the gift of being. But He governs every faculties with marvelous ease. For He is not dealing with alien materials which He has received from elsewhere, but with his own materials which He makes Himself. He does not affect them from without, but moves them from within. For He is present in the very heart of all faculties. He does not toil away in many (actions]; rather, through His own being, which is the universal axis, He rotates the axes which follow upon it: essence, life, mind, soul, nature, matter. As someone who is a Platonist would say, by means of the axis appropriate to each order He rotates the appropriate order itself: all essences by means of one essence, all lives by means of one life, all minds by means of one mind, similarly individual souls by means of one soul. individual natures by means of one nature, individual materials by means of one matter. No faculties resists His decree, for He is superior to every faculties by a measure· less distance. Divinely Orpheus sang of this divine nature: "Turning (its) swift onrush on a perpetual axis.''s A sinew has been found neat the nape of an animal's neck that when rugged moves all the animal's limbs simultaneously so that they are individually moved each in its own way. According to Aristotle in his Trearise on the World, the limbs of the world are moved by God with a similar ug. se This manifestly asserts the existence of providence, which Aristotle also signifies in the tenth book of the Nicomachean and in the Physics, where he shows that nature everywhere looks to a certain end-the best possible -and that its works are the works of an understanding that does not crr.s We saw recently in Florence a small cabinet made by a German  craftsman in which statues of different animals were all connected to, and kept in balance by, a single ball. When the ball moved, they moved too, but in different ways: some ran to the right, others to the left, upwards or downwards, some that were sitting stood up, others that were standing fell down, some crowned others, and they in turn wounded others. There was heard too the blare of trumpets and horns and the songs of birds; and other faculties happened there simultaneously and a host of similar events occurred, and merely from one movement of one ball. Thus God through His own being, which is in reality the same as His under• standing and His will, or is some faculties entirely simple-the universal center from whom {as we have declared elsewhere) the rest of faculties are drawn out like lines -has only to nod His head and every faculties which depends on Him trembles. Let us heat no more from Lucretius the Epicurean, who wants  the world to come about and be borne along by chance, and who believes that the constant condition of its order, beautiful and full of forms, proceeds from an unstable and formless privation of order, as if someone were to suppose that wisdom was born from stupidity, or light from datkness.0 Tell me Lucretius, whenever you make a casual movement, without plan or purpose, do you always proceed by a single direct route to the same specific goal? Of course not. You wander hither and thither. And when you are playing with stones, not using any skill and without a pre-established plan, do you erect a building with stoutly built walls all in order, a building extremely elegant to look at and ideally suited to its purpose? Of course not. What you make is a useless and unsightly pile of stones. Think of plants and animals: their separate parts are so designed that the position of one is to the advantage of another; they serve each other. Certainly, when one is removed, the whole structure is virtually destroyed. Next, all their parts are arranged for the sake of the composite whole, and the composite itself, that is, the plant or animal, is equipped with the instruments it needs to do the works of its own nature: the foods, the habitats, and the seasons have been provided for all. Earth and water provide food for them; the heavens temper the water and earth. In the end all the world's parts come together to form for tle whole world a unique harmonious beauty from which no faculties can be subtracted and to which no faculties can be added. If you had to provide for crces and animals using all your wisdom, would you have done it differently? No, nor differently, but nor as well. A wisdom greater than yours designed these faculties, otherwise day after day you would be seeing faculties everywhere with missing limbs or organs: dogs born from horse semen, Ii.gs from apples, human limbs attached to lions, humans with the limbs of asses, scats falling, and stones ascending. But in reality because the individual parts of the world, having been born from particular seeds and endowed with distinctive shapes, seek and seek again specific goals-seek them by the most direct route, at the appropriate times and arrangements, and in a manner both very beautiful and ideally suited -it follows that they are moved in the same way as those faculties enacted by human skill and design. If faculties are moved in this same way, then it is by the same skill  almost and the same design; but by a design which is the more eminent to the degree that faculties are arranged more beautifully and with more stability-by a design, I say, which is neither changeable nor subject to motion but absolutely certain and in• scant, and which is intuitive rather than discursive. For if no hesitation nor violation of rule nor correction occurs in his work, then there is no lack of certainty in the craftsman. Using a metaphor we call such intuition a "design," not because some faculties in this case are known by way of others, but because some are done for the sake of others. People who are unskilled usually seek counsel about making some faculties. But a consummately skilled craftsman no longer deliberates: he works from habit just as nature does with its forms. But imperfect skill exists anywhere, it is in the making of this wonderful artifact, the world. Perhaps you will claim that this skill resides in nature, which is devoid of all sense. But I would reply that it is you who are devoid of sense if you are so fat from having sense not to see that, if all the little beasts on earth have sense, much more must the whole world and nature, the universal craftsman, have sense -and by sense I mean rational sense, if nature designs its artifacts more rationally than man's reason can. Daily familiarity dulls our sense of wonder. But had your parents brought you up from infancy immured in a house so that you had never gazed upon this wonderful beauty of the world before you were thirty, then doubtless you would so wonder at this new spectacle of nature that, however much you had doubted beforehand, yet afterwards you could never doubt that all faculties are made and ruled by the providence of the one all-knowing craftsman. Therefore we must accept, 0 Lucretius, that since the world's  parts and effects proceed in constant order, then of necessity the whole world itself cannot now proceed, nor could it have proceeded at its inception, without constancy and order. Next we have to accept that the world does not move of its own accord without life; nor is it revolved so long and so reguratly without life at its most powerful; nor revolved in such an orderly manner without mind at its wisest; nor revolved so excellently and so aptly without the highest good. But a unique life, queen over the unique world body, excelling in power, wisdom, and goodness, has most providentially directed the world from the beginning and without ceasing towards the best. This life is either the highest God, or a handmaid of the highest God. If it is the highest God, then clearly God is provident. God is provident too if life is His handmaid, since the first principle acts on and moves all for His sake. Orpheus describes Jupiter in these divine words: "Father, beginning and end of all faculties." If the life of the world provides, guided certainly by God, it provides, therefore, for God's end. Thus all faculties are directed finally to God's goodness. This goodness, since it has a care for its whole work, certainly  does not neglect any of the parts. For the excellence of the stare and condition of the whole composite structure depends on the parts comprising it. Orpheus sums up the matter thus: "You see all within, you heat all within, you distribute all." But since the world's structure as a whole has been established for the sake of recalling the divine goodness, and since the world's parts have been set in place for the sake of the structure, the absolutely highest perfection should nor be sought for in the whole work, but only enough perfection to indicate, insofar as it can, the more sublime perfection of its author. In any one of the world's parts we should not demand any and every perfection of that part, but rather that which is in harmony with the remaining parts and connects it to the whole. ,us, although any one condition of any particular part of the world may sometimes seem to be defective in itself, yet if we compare that condition to the stare of the whole, then we will find that the world cannot be better arranged than it is. The Founder of the universe does not refer the whole to any of its parts, but rather the parts to the whole. So what may seem bad or ugly as fat as the parts are concerned will in the end contribute justly to the beauty and good of the whole. That is why Orpheus calls God: "Sempiternal life and immortal ptovidcncc." Mercury [Trismegistus] says that this providence is the protectress of the human ract.• And in the Laws book four Plato declares that God contains the beginnings, middles, and ends of all faculties; that He encircles all and rightly disposes individual faculties; that He is gracious to men who are meek and devout even as He punishes the proud and the impious.~ Plato supposes that providence does not impact the freedom of 0 our will to choose, but rather serves that freedom -he explains this in the tenth book of the Republic and in the Statesman and the Critias because God makes not so much by knowing as by willing, otherwise He would have made and would make all faculties simultaneously, and additionally would make bad faculties. Again, just as all future events are written down in God's foreknowledge, so too are the causes of those events and their modes of action. Just as our deeds are known to God, so too is our will which is the cause of our deeds and the manner of freely doing them. For just as He foresees what you are going to do, so He foresees that you are going to do it voluntarily and freely. Wherefore the divine foreknowledge, if it renders our deeds necessary by imposing some condition, similarly it renders necessary - it confirms in other words -our manner of doing them, that is, the freedom of our judgment. Because God, the universal moderator, preserves each faculties, He does not retract its nature once He has given it. Thus, while He rules over all, He rules over individuals according to the nature of each, helping the ascending elements in their as cent, the descending elements in their descent. If He rules over the movement of animals, He helps them to move forward because their motion is naturally progressive. If He guides the heavens He helps them complete their full circuit because their natural motion, given their rotundity, is to revolve. If He impels thinking souls, because they too revolve but are free to go upwards or downwards, He freely impels them, so that He attracts them rather than dragging them along, persuades not compels them. Zoroaster attests to this: "The Father does not inspire feat but leads by pcrsuasion.'' But since the prime mover has to prevail, has to rule, in Plato's  view it so compels thinking souls in a way towards the good that they cannot nor wish for the good. For all faculties necessarily want the good, and because of the good they want whatever they want, just as they necessarily want not to have the bad, and because of the bad do not want whatever they do not want. For if the adequate object of the appetite or will is the good itself, then goodness is certainly the reason for the appetite desiring whatever it desires, so that in every faculties it desires it desires the good, just as the sight sees the light in every color. But if it desires to desire no faculties further, then the will is choosing this emptying itself of desiring as the good. Therefore the thinking soul is necessarily borne towards the good. But because God has to preserve the nature proper to the thinking soul, He leaves its judgment free. Through this free judgment the soul can deliberate in its own manner about what it should do, judge from the many options before it that one faculties is better than another, and elect what it judges to be particularly appropriate for attaining the good. BOOK III : I : We descend through the five levels by which we ascended and set up an appropriate comparison between them. So fat we have made our ascent from body to quality, from quality  to soul, from soul to angel, and from angel to God, the one, the true and the good, author and ruler of all faculties. The Pythagoreans describe body as "the many," quality as "the many and the one," soul as "the one and the many," angel as the "one-many," and God as "the one." Because body is undetermined with regard to any particular species and is by its own nature endlessly divided, so its matter, they claim, would be in flux infinitely if form did not call it to a halt and give it unity. Quality contributes to limiting matter by a species; it is in itself undivided in a way, but becomes divisible by being mixed with body. Soul limits matter by a species; it is not divisible either in itself or through the body's contamination but is a mobile plurality. Angel is the receptacle of (all] the species and is an immobile plurality. God is above the species, an unmoving unity. God, they say, is absolutely indissoluble, because He is Himself unity and stability: bodies, however, being composed of elements, are completely dissoluble because in them plurality overcomes unity, and movement stability. But angels, souls, spheres, and stats, they say, appear dissoluble in a way in that they contain parts; but they are indissoluble in that their unity and stability surpass their plurality and motion. This is what provides the divine bond whereby God, in Timaeus' view, always preserves faculties that are in themselves dissoluble from dissolution. So powerful is the gift of unity itself and of stability that only  at the lowest level of the universe does it seem to be overtaken by its opposites {multiplicity and motion]. Yet even there the gift sometimes prevails in a way, since it continually keeps the matter, which is subject to infinite plurality and change, constant in the unity of substance and order. God, of course, is unity, as I have already shown. He is immoveable, being moved neither by another, since no faculties is stronger than He, nor by Himself, since He cannot pass over into any faculties better in that He is the good itself. No faculties, however, moves towards the worse of its own accord. But if someone were to say that God flows from one faculties into another, then we will ask whether or not He acquires any faculties new. If He acquires no faculties new, then He has not been changed. If He acquires some faculties new, then He did not possess all faculties before· hand. What does not possess all faculties is not God. Because God is everywhere, He does not change place. Because He is the end of all faculties, He does nor move with respect to another. Because He is most simple, He does not move even within Himself. For if He moved in Himself. He would either move one part of Himself towards another, or at least combine in Himself some new faculties with the old. For as regards substance, He would be what He was before, but He would in addition assume a new form -in which case He would no longer be entirely simple. Again, God is unity itself. Unity is the basis of stability itself,  because, just as movement is a progression towards plurality, so stability rests in unity. In any nature we call stable that which continually possesses one habitual condition such that It never departs from the unity of its nature. But who would suggest that the foundation of all stability is itself subject to change We can confirm this line of reasoning by turning to the arguments of Numenius the Pythagorean.  He declares that any faculties that changes in the past or the future contains some admixture of privation, for the future is not yet and the past is no longer. But in God, since He is the prime being and highest act, there is no privation. Therefore God is unchangeable. Angel too is not subject to movement, because it drinks in  goodness from God, the fount of all goodness, through itself, without any intermediary; and at one point in eternity it is filled, and it remains brimful with goodness forever. But since every effect that is produced outside its cause retains some faculties of its cause and yet emerges inferior also to the cause, angel, being ere· acts closest to God, retains and yet loses some faculties of God. God possesses unity and stability, Angel cannot retain both; for then it would be God, not angel. Yet it does not lose both either, for the first of God's works and the nearest to Him would then emerge as completely unlike its maker. So which does it retain, unity alone or stability~ It cannot have unity alone without stability; for unity is utterly motionless. So it will retain stability but fall away from simple unity, the result being that angel is plurality without movement. Indeed, it is quite reasonable to assign plurality to angel, because, if it were perfect and complete unity, it would be the highest and unlimited power, since power resides in unity. But God alone is unlimited power. If it is the characteristic of body to receive and to be acted  upon, but characteristic of incorporeal nature to give and to act, then in corporeal nature dwells what we call potency ( the potency the theologians call receptive or passive), and in incorporeal nature act, that is, the capacity for action. Therefore quality, since it is in a sense incorporeal in itself, has some power to act, and can be referred to as act. But because it is received in matter and divided up and thus made in a way corporeal, it is not pure act but rather act contaminated with the passivity of body. So quality is composed of both act and potency. Soul, though it is separable from matter and on account of this called act, and though it has no faculties to do with the passivity of body, nonetheless is not yet pure act. For it is moveable. If some faculties is moved, it obtains through movement what beforehand it had lacked. As it was lacking, it has the potency we call receptive or in a way passive. But as it is acting by moving some faculties, It is are, and whenever It obtains some faculties, it is made are too. Soul then is composed of potency and act. Surely angel is not pure act: Not at all. Obviously God, be- cause He is at the furthest remove from matter ( wherein exists the passive potency without any power of acting), is understood to be the pure force of acting separated from the nature of receiving or sustaining. If God is pure act, then angel cannot be. For what is one in itself can never become many, except by the addition of a nature alien to it. The nature and definition of pure act itself is unique. It is in God, obviously. If it were also said to be in angel, we would have to ask whether or not any faculties exists in angel besides act. If no faculties exists, then only one pure act is left, since the act that is attributed to angel does not differ from the act of God, in that no faculties is present in both besides act and act itself by its very reason is one. But if some faculties besides act is added to angel, then angel is no longer pure act, but has been contaminated by some sort of mixture; and it is not absolute act, but act of a particular sort. In the same way some faculties green or red is not pure light, but light plus some quality of the elements which makes it red or green. Thus angel too is composed of act and potency. This is what Plato means in the Pl,ilebs when he says that God  is the limit of all faculties and is free from the infinite, while all faculties besides God are composed of the limit and the infinite.  The limit Plato calls act and the infinite, potency (potency, in itself undetermined, is limited and given form by act). But to return to our subject. The potency of angel is in its cs- sense, which is in a way brought into being by God prior to receiving form from Him. For at the first moment of its creation angel only exists. In the next moment it is illumined by its creator so that it becomes intelligent and takes on form. So its essence is in a way formless in the beginning, exposed like a passive substrate to receive the act of understanding and the ornament of the forms and ideas. Zoroaster puts it like this: "The father perfected all faculties and presented them to the second mind." Angel then is a plurality, since it is composed of many faculties, a plurality I should add nor subject to movement. With respect to plurality, it is of course inferior to God in that it is nor a true unity as God is. With respect to mobility, it approaches Him in that it is almost, so to speak, immobile just as God is. After God, an unmoving unity, it is correct then to place angel  next, an unmoving plurality; and then after angel, soul, which is more distant from God still, since it is a plurality subject to movement. It is a plurality because no faculties after God can be absolutely simple unity. And it is in some respect subject to movement be· cause the further it recedes from God, the closer it comes to corporeal qualities which are totally subject to movement. If it were entirely immobile, it would be angel; if entirely mobile, it would be quality. Yee there has to be a mean between angel and corporeal qualities in order that angel, which is entirely immobile, not be directly juxtaposed to quality, which is entirely mobile. Thus the mean has to be partly immobile and yet partly mobile. This Substance will be at rest, not changing in size or in any other respect. But its activity will be in flux, and it will do now this and now that, and in one way and in another. But quality is inferior to soul because it changes in its essence and operation. Body is inferior to quality, for quality is moved itself and moves other faculties, for it moves bodies. Body indeed is moved but moves no faculties. That it is one some faculties and is act, angel owes not to itself but 0 to God who is truly one and the purest act. But that it is plural, it owes to itself by way of its power of receiving and being acted upon. Insofar as it has been created outside God, it falls short of the perfection of its creator. So plurality is natural to angel. Soul too owes the fact that it is a single substance and in essence a stable act not to itself but to the gift of God, who is the one absolutely stable acc. Its plurality and passivity It owes to itself because it is beneath God; its mobility it also owes to itself because it is beneath angel. So just as unity is natural to God and plurality to angel, so motion is natural to soul. God's light created angel but under the shadow of God. God's n light created soul but under the shadow of angel. From God's single act angel acquires its stable unity, while under God's shadow it slips into plurality. From God's light soul obtains stability, while under His shadow it has plurality, and under the shadow of angel, mutability. God is the fount of unity, angel, the fount of plurality, soul, the fount of motion. God through Himself is unity, angel through God is one but through itself is many. Soul is one through God, many through God's shadow (being together with angel beneath God), and mobile through itself. Quality owes its ability to impel some faculties into motion to what is above it; to itself it owes its capacity for being mixed with matter. Body owes its ability to act to quality; but to itself alone its capacity to be acted upon. Quality is one degree superior to body in that it moves it, but one degree inferior to soul in that it is set in motion by soul. Soul is one degree superior to quality in that it moves itself, but one degree inferior to angel in that it is subject to change. Angel is one degree superior to soul in that it is at rest, but one degree inferior to God in that it is many. Yet by virtue of this one aspect alone God surpasses every faculties  to an infinite extent. Zoroaster expresses it like this: "The father enraptured himself; he did nor implant his own special fire in the mind that follows him." It is as though he were saying that God cannot be compared with any faculties else. Body can only be moved by another; it does no faculties of its own nature. Quality both moves another and is moved by another. Soul moves another but is moved by itself. Angel moves others (in the sense that it acts on others), and is itself at rest-not at rest through itself but through the divine unity. For, as we said before, what is being at rest other than persisting in the unity of one's nature? Angel also moves through God. For whatever all agents do, they do through the power of the prime act. God moves and does all through Himself, and is Himself at rest through Himself. Because all that are what they are through another are brought back to a first some faculties which is what it is through itself, so all that are both at rest and move others by another we refer back to God who through Himself is both at rest and moves others. And all that are moveable by another, such as bodies and qualities, we refer back to soul which is mobile through itself-mobile through itself, I should add, because if you descend from God through angel, it will appear that both God and angel are at rest. The first mobile faculties you will come across is soul. Whatever is first of its kind in any genus is such through itself; for instance, the first in the genus of light or heat lights or heats through itself. Thus soul, because it is the first mobile entity among all faculties that move, is mobile through itself. An indication of this is that bodies which lack soul are only set in motion by some external impulse, while those that have soul move of their own accord and in any direction they wish. Since soul gives bodies the ability to be moved in any direction in a way through themselves, it follows that soul truly is the first to be mobile through itself: it is the first mobile faculties. For through its presence an image of its capacity to move on its own appears in body, and from this arises movement in every direction, This proves that soul is the source of movement and that the uncontrolled turbulence of the universe issues from it. This, I think, is the solution to that Pythagorean riddle appropriated by Xenocrares, namely that soul is "self-moving number" -"number" indicating its plural nature, "self-moving·· that its property is to be mutable.  As I have pointed out, we have a number of arguments already  to the effect that an entity of this nature must exist somewhere. First, every faculties which derives its nature from another can be referred back to some faculties which is what it is through itself. Second, since many faculties exist which are moved by another, if all were such, then we would either wander on to infinity, or else go found and found in the same circle. Consequently the first and last mover would be the same, the cause would be the same as the effect, and no order would exist anywhere. Therefore we are compelled to active at a mover that is not already moved by another. But the mover which immediately precedes bodies which are moved by another is not totally immoveable. For then there would be too great a distance between what is moved by another and what is completely at rest. lcIt mean is what is mutable through itself. Third, if the closer a faculties is to its mover the better it is moved, and if we have to reach the best motion, then somewhere there has to be some faculties in which the essence of the faculties moved and of the mover are identical. Fourth, if some faculties has to be set in motion, then either the mover has to tum towards the faculties to be moved, or vice-versa, or both by turns. So let us imagine that in nature there exist only angels, God, and bodies. God and angels, because they are immutable, will not turn towards bodies; nor bodies towards them, because bodies are naturally inactive. So no movement will exist at all in nature. lercforc there has to be some mutable nature which of its own accord turns towards inactive bodies and arouses them. Always alert, it experiences changes in itself before producing them in body, with the result that, just as corporeal substance is made by spiritual substance, so corporeal movement is produced by spiritual movement. I think Plato realised this when he asked in the Laws: "If every faculties were currently at rest and somewhat later some faculties had to move, what would be the first faculties to move. Obviously it would be what moves easily on its own, as being closest to the power of moving and whose motion is followed by every faculties else also subject to motion. In the Phaedrus Plato calls this the source and principle of motion: "the source" because it has motion from itself, "the principle" because it pours it out into other faculties. At this point a doubt arises. If God and angel move some faculties,  and soul is subordinate to them and assuredly aroused to action by them, how then is it moved by itself? Lee us answer in this way. When Apelles admitted a meadow, he tried to paint a picture of it with colors. All the meadow instantaneously appeared and instantaneously excited Apelles' desire {to paint it] . This instantaneous appearance and incitement can be called act it is true, since it does some faculties, but not movement, since it does not act step by step. For movement is act that traverses moments in time. But the (subsequent] act of observing and painting which occurs in Apelles is called movement because it does take place gradually. He looks first at one Tower, then at another, and he paints them in the same way. To be sure, it is the meadow that makes Apelles' soul see it and yearn to paint it, but it does this instantaneously. It is Apelles' soul, not the meadow, that makes him look first at one blade of grass then at another over various moments of time and to depict them in the same gradual way. And it is the nature of his soul not to examine various blades of grass and represent them all at once but to do so gradually. The beginning and end of this movement which consists in seeing and painting is the meadow; for the painter's observation began with the meadow and his desire is directed towards it. But the source by means of which such an act occurs gradually over time and is called movement is the soul of the painter himself. According to the Platonists, the rational soul in a kind of perpetual light similarly considers or conjectures about God in a way and angel, and desires to paint itself in their likeness, now in speculation, now in its behavior and activity. Gradually, in forming it• self, it moves itself. This movement properly does Tow our of the soul's own nature as its own fountain of movement defined as activity within time; but it is aroused by those above, as by a beginning and end outside itself. This stream that flows into the soul from those above is one, constant, instantaneous and eternal; and insofar as it can it produces the same in the soul, namely effects that are instantaneous, constant and eternal. That the soul's activities and works, however, occur and change gradually over time is the result of the nature proper to the soul being much weaker than chose above. Let me give you a single example which will illustrate the whole  matter. The Sun gets its light from itself and in an instant pours it into Mercury. Mercury likewise receives all its light in an instant, and remains thereafter always brimful of light. Likewise, the Sun pours the same light in an instant into the Moon, yet the Moon does not receive it in an instant but over the course of time. For according as she turns herself towards the Sun ac one time in one way, at another in another, so she variously receives his light; and because of her very nature she varies with the light's alteration. The Sun represents God, Mercury represents angel, and the Moon, soul. What I say about Mercury take as said likewise about the other scats above the Moon. The angels relate to God as the stats to the Sun. But the soul alone relates to God as the Moon to the Sun. So no faculties prevents the soul from descending from the divine and apprehending the divine, and yet fi-om being moved by its own nature and from being able always to be moved and to live. : II : The soul is the middle level of being. It links and unites all the levels above it and below it when it ascends to the higher and descends to the lower levels. So that we may finally reach the desired goal, let us once more assemble faculties on five levels, placing God and angel at the summit of nature, body and quality at the foot, but soul halfway between chose on high and those below. We would do well to call soul the third and middle essence, as the Platonists do, because it is the mean for all and the third from both directions. If you descend from God, you will find soul at the third level down; or at the third level up, if you ascend from body. We believe that such an essence in nature is an absolute necessity. Because angel, as the Platonists say, truly is (it is always unchanging), whereas quality becomes (it is set in motion at any time), it follows that quality differs totally from angel, both because it is subject to movement and angel is at rest, and because it comes into being at some point and the other always exists. So a mean is needed which shares some that are entities with angel and others with quality. What can that be? Is it that which exists eternally at rest -for a time or two? No. For such a faculties cannot be found. For what remains eternally at rest for a time -remains, that is, either because of itself or because of its proximity to rest-also remains forever. Therefore the mean will be that which is forever becoming or being moved. Because it is forever, It is in harmony with angel, because it is being moved, with quality. Consequently, a third essence must exist as their mean, which can always be in motion and alive, and which can by means of its motion infuse life into bodies. The Platonists were right in saying that above what exists for a portion of time is what exists for all time: and above that in turn is what exists eternally; and above that is eternity. But between the things that are purely eternal and those that are purely temporal is soul, a bond as it were linking the two. In this respect the most important parts of the world's body are in a way similar to soul. Some place the sphere of the empyrean, being absolutely motionless, in eternity, but the other spheres simultaneously in eternity and time, and compounded objects finally in time alone. Similarly, they place pure intellect on the first level of being, ensouled intellects on the second, and corporeal souls on the third. But let us return to our theme. Every work composed of several parts is at its most perfect when its members are so firmly connected together that it becomes completely one, is consistent with and in harmony with itself, and does not easily break apart. Corporeal nature demonstrates this clearly in the blending of the four elements, where earth and fire, which are fat apart, are linked together by air and water. Even more must we posrubcc such bonding of parts in God's universal work, in order for the one God's work to be one too. Now God and body are the extremes of nature and completely different from each other. Angel does not link them, for the whole of angel reaches up towards God and neglects body. For it is with justice that the most perfect of God's creatures and that closest to Him should become completely godlike and pass over into God. Nor does quality connect the two extremes, since it sinks downwards to body, abandons those above, and, having abandoned the incorporeal, becomes corporeal. This is for all are extremes, and the higher and the lower Rec from each other since they lack a proper bond. But the third essence set between them is such that it cleaves to the higher while not abandoning the lower; and in it, therefore, the higher and the lower are linked together. For it is both immobile and mobile. The former characteristic it shares with the higher, the latter with the lower. If it shares characteristics with both, it seeks after both. So by a natural instinct it ascends to the higher and descends to the lower. In ascending, it does not abandon the faculties below it; in descending, it does not relinquish the faculties above it. For were it to abandon either, it would swing to the opposite extreme and no longer be the world's true bond. It acts in the same way as air, which is an intermediary between fire and water, combining with fire to produce heat and with water to produce humidity. The combination with fire keeps it always hot, with water, damp. In the first case it is rarefied and bright like fire, in the second it becomes sluggish like water. Or rather, it acts like the light of the Sun. Sunlight descends from the Sun into fire and fills the fire without abandoning the Sun. It always clings to the Sun and it always fills the fire. It mixes with the air yet is not infected by the air's contagion. Similarly, the third es· sense must cling to faculties divine and fill faculties mortal. When it dings to faculties divine, because it is spiritually united with them and spiritual union begets knowledge, it knows them. When it fills bodies, moving them from within, it gives them life. Thus it is the mirror of faculties divine, the life of faculties mortal, the bond joining the two. But how is it joined to bodies? Are we to suppose that when it  enters a body it is in contact only with a single point of that body? Is this what we mean when we say it is united with bodies? Surely not. For it would be united with a point not with a body; nor would it bring life to the whole of the body but only to the point, while the body as a whole would lack life. Or rather, if it remained concentrated into a single point and thus united to itself, it would be the same as the angel, which is fat removed from the body; or at least it would ding to faculties divine in this way but abandon bodies. So it is nor attached to one point only of the body, but to many points, and thus fills the body's parts. But are we to suppose that it fills them in the way that whiteness fills white flesh, or any other quality wholly fills its own matter? Certainly not. For if that were so, it would be the same as a quality and, having abandoned faculties divine, it would completely decline towards the body. Whiteness is so present in the flesh as a whole that it is extended and divided up equally with the flesh into many parts; and thus, as the physicists tell us, part of whiteness is in part of the flesh: a larger part of whiteness in a larger part of the flesh, a smaller part in a smaller. In this way whiteness has become corporeal. The essence we are supposing the third essence would suffer the  same fare if it were extended through body in the same way as whiteness. Dragged towards one of the extremes of nature, it would cease to be the link that binds the world together. There• fore when it enters a body, it is present in its entirety in the individual parts of the body. It is not divided up or separated into any parts in order to be present in the parts of the body that are distance from each other. For it is through its undivided power, not its quantitative extension, that it makes contact with the body. Remaining whole and simple, therefore, it becomes present as an un• divided whole in the individual parts, just as a spoken word and its meaning are wholly and simultaneously present in a manner in the different parts of a house in that they are heated and understood almost simultaneously in the different parts. Nor is it impossible for this essence, in spite of being undivided and existing in itself, to be thus present in its entirety throughout the broad mass of a body. Indeed, because it is undivided and not confined in a location, it can, in its entirety, penetrate or envelop all of whatever is confined in a location. For the extension of quantity, wherever it is found, does prevent such (ubiquitous] power and presence, with the result that some faculties extended by way of quantity cannot be present in its entirety in many faculties at once. Moreover, even if that faculties is undivided, It is attracted somewhere to the quantity of a body, just as the point at the end of a line is imprinted in the line. The faculties cannot be present in its entirety throughout different parts of the body at the same time. Similarly, a point imprinted somewhere in any radius of a circle is not present in the other radii, nor is it spread along the length of the whole radius or throughout the circle. But the point which is the center of the circle and does not belong to any particular radius is found in a way in all the radii that are drawn from the center to the circumference. And although no point imprinted on the circumference regards the whole circle equally, yet the center, which properly is not artached to any circumference, does regard the whole circle equally. So that faculties being divided cannot be present in its entirety at the same time in many faculties, nor can it, even if it is undivided, yet have a fixed position in another divided faculties. The third cs• scncc, however, is neither subject to extension -for then it would be a quality-nor is It positioned somewhere in extension-for It would nor be moved freely of itself if it did not subsist of itself. It is like a point then that is in itself alive and totally free from quantity and from being in a location. Therefore it encircles the body's every position, and when it enters the body, because it is not itself a point properly of any one quantity, It is nor restricted to any particular point of the body's quantity. Since it lies outside the genus of quantity, it is not limited to touching some particular point of quantity, Like the center of a circle, it is in every radius and in the circle as a whole. It also follows from this that the third essence is simultaneously  both divided and undivided: divided, because it spreads its life bringing shadow through the body's division when it communicares itself to the body's different parts; undivided, because It is present at the same time whole and unmixed. le is divided, I re• peat, because its shadow is in all the body which is divided; but it is undivided, because it exists entire in an undivided way in any pare of the body. Again, it is undivided, because it has a stable and unified substance; but it is divided, because in the course of its operation it is divided into many parts when it acts through movement and in time. Third, it is undivided, because It looks up at faculties above which are fully unified; but it is divided, because it sinks down towards faculties below which are utterly divided. Such a nature seems to be completely necessity in the world's order, in order that, after God and angel, who cannot be divided according to time or dimension, but before body and qualities, which are dis-persed in time and dimension, a harmonious mean may exist, a mean that may be divided in a way by sequential temporal activity but not divided by dimension, and that may neither remain always gathered in a nature of its own like God and angel, nor be scartered about like body and quality, but be undivided and divided equally. This is that essence which Timaeus of Locri and Plato in the  De Muclo 0 described as compounded from undivided and divided nature. This is what implants itself in faculties mortal without itself becoming mortal. For just as it implants itself as a whole and is not split asunder, so it withdraws as a whole and is not dispersed. And because it controls bodies while it also clings to faculties divine, it is the mistress of bodies, not their companion. This is the grearest miracle in nature. For the remaining faculties below God are each individually some faculties singular in themselves, but this essence is all faculties together. It possesses within itself images of faculties divine on which it depends, and these images are the reasons and paradigms of the lower entities which in some sense it produces. Because it is the universal mean, it possesses the powers of all. If this is so, it passes into all. And since it is the true bond of every faculties in the universe, when it passes into some faculties, it does not abandon others, but it moves into individuals while forever preserving all faculties. It can with justice, accordingly, be called nature's center, the mean of every faculties in the universe, the succession or chain of the world, the countenance of all faculties, and the knot and bond of the world. I think I have said enough about the nature of this third essence. That it is the proper scat of the rational soul, however, we can easily see from the following definition of the rational soul: "It is life which understands discursively, and gives life to the body in time." These are precisely the characteristics of the third essence. For it is alive, it understands, and it gives life to the body. It is obviously alive, for among terrestrial beings, the ones we describe as alive are chose that are moved by an inner power of their own in all directions, up and down, forward and backward, to the right and to the left. That is the way plants and animals are moved. So where movement exists that is internal and common [ to the whole body], there is life. What I mean by life then is where this internal power of moving exists. This power is to be found pre-eminently in the source, origin and first movement of all activity. For movement is internal and common to the utmost degree where it is the first. But first movement is locared in that third essence. So that is where life is -life of such a sort that bodies come alive and are moved through participation in it. For life by its very nature is as close as possible to bodies. That third essence then is the life which gives life to bodies. It is also intelligent. If motion is perfect anywhere, the most  perfect must be where the first motion is. For no perfection whatsoever exists in larer motions unless It derives from the first motion. So the motion in the third essence is the most perfect of all motions. But this is the motion that departs as little as possible from its source; that remains very much joined to its foundation; that is single and equal to the grearest possible degree; that is sufficient for itself; and that imitates the most perfect figure. This, as everybody would agree, is the circular motion, which is also the only sempiternal motion among motions. Others reach a limit beyond which they may not proceed, since nowhere is there infinite space. But circular motion, as it recurs once, so it recurs twice, three times, four times, and for the same reason; and in the circuit the end and the beginning are the same. Thus when it seems to be finishing, it is just beginning. Sempiternal circular motion, then, is proper to the third essence insofar as the essence is brought back in a circle to itself through motion. If it is moved from itself, it is also moved to itself, in order for it to make an end of the motion where a beginning exists, seeing that the cause itself of motion, in a sense, produces motion for its own sake. So the third essence, scarting from itself, circles perpetually back to itself. by unfolding its powers from the highest powers, through the middle and down to the lowest, and likewise by enfolding them again commencing from the lowest, through the middle, and up to the highest. If this is so, it must be awake of itself and what it contains within itself. If it is awake, it must know. But it knows by understanding as long as it recognizes its essence as spiritual and free from the limitations of matter. For it is knowledge of such which is c:tllcd understanding. We can see in our own c:isc that knowledge is no faculties other than spiritual union with some spiritual form. Sight occurs when its spirit is joined to the spiritual image of colors. If the union is to matter, it sees no faculties-this is obvious if someone puts a solid body in the line of sight. Our mind too, having been joined by our spiritual power with the incorporeal species and reasons of faculties, understands objects themselves. Similarly, when the third essence, which is spiritual of course, is joined to itself, it knows and understands itself by becoming awake of itself in a spiritual way. It also understands faculties divine, to which it dings :is closely :is possible in a spiritual way. And it understands faculties corporeal, to which by nature it also descends. It knows, I say, by a discursive process over time, since through its activity it is mobile. From :ill this we can put together the following definition of the  third essence. It is life that of its own nature gives life to bodies. It also knows itself and divine and natural faculties through discursive reasoning. But anyone who cannot see that this definition is identical to the definition of rational soul lacks a rational soul. Wherefore the rational soul has its scat in the third essence, and occupies the middle region of nature, and joins all faculties into one. BOOK IV : I : There are three levels of rational souls: in the first is the world soul, in the second the souls of the spheres, in the third the souls of the living creatures contained within the individual spheres. We started by recognizing five levels of being in ascending order.  Next, we took them in descending order and contemplared them together. Thirdly, we placed rational soul on the middle level. Now we will examine the levels of rational soul in the manner of the theologians who were followers of Hermes Trismegisrus. Generation is the principle of nourishment and growth. For  nowhere can any faculties be nourished or grow without the generation of particular parts. But where nutrition follows generation and growth there we know for certain that life and soul are presence. But we see the earth generating large numbers of trees and living creatures from their own seeds, and nourishing them and making them grow. Stones grow too like its teeth, and planes like hairs as long as they are artached by the toots; but as soon as they are pulled up or torn out of the earth, they stop growing. Who would say that the womb of this mother lacks life, when of her own accord she brings forth and nourishes so many offspring, when she sustains itself, and when her back produces teeth and hairs? The same holds true of water's body. Therefore water and earth possess soul.  unless perhaps someone were to say that the living faculties, which we claim are made from the soul of earth or of water, since they seem to lack their own seeds, are not born from such a soul, but from the influences of the celestial souls ( of the stats]. Platonists, however, will deny that celestial influences, as particular accidents fat removed from their own living substances, can generate a living substance here on earth. For accident cannot generate substance, unless it is subject as an instrument to the substance; and I mean to the substance closest to It. For apart from the craftsman an instrument is not moved to craft the form of an artifact. Thus an influence descending from celestial life will not generate a vital form if it is fat removed from that life itself. Quite properly. this celestial impulse, because it is common to every element, is limited in any one element to producing in the element a particular life from the life which is common to the whole clement: it serves it as an instrument. But in no way will the celestial impulse itself generate (life]. Since no faculties can act above its own level of being, in no way can accident generate substance: it can only dispose matter by a sort of accidental preparation. A convincing argument that this generative life, however, must be present in the elements is that a substance is needed as agent to generate substance, and the perfect presence of the agent itself is needed for (such] a perfect action. But when one corporeal substance approaches another in order to act on it in some way, what is substantial in the agent remains outside [ the patient]; what penetrates within is entirely accidental. But penetrating substance (not accident] is needed in order for substance to be made, and perfectly made from it. Such substance is incorporeal and living. Natural causes, moreover, because they are by way of their own  nature, are borne towards a definite effect only because of the definite rational principle of their own nature, otherwise they would no more tend towards one effect than another. Consequently to the extent they are fitted to doing a work, they do it; and vice versa. Therefore planes and living faculties which appear to come to birth in the earth only as a result of putrefaction must arise from their own causes no less than faculties born from propagation. But where are these causes of theirs? Undoubtedly the proper causes ofterrestrial lives are in terrestrial life. For even were you to artribute the causes to celestial souls, the general celestial impulses will nevertheless have to be confineds within particular earthly souls by way of the universal soul of the earth, in order for you to proceed from what is celestial and general to its opposite, what is earthly and particular, by way of an appropriate intermediaty, what is earthly and yet general. Again, even were you to posit the said proper causes in the ton-s lluence of many agents, in the end you would still have to assign one specific determined cause to its proper order; and this cause will order and determine the different causes flowing together from all directions in order to achieve the proper effect. The proper causes, therefore, will be in the soul of the earth, which will produce a vine by means of the natural idea or rational principle of the vine, and produce flies through the rational principle of llies. It will make them such, I should add, in matter that has first been made specifically ready by the soul itself, when in order to prepare the matter it tontracted the terrestrial impulses in specific ways. Hence, if human art is no faculties but an imitation of nature, and this art fashions Its produces by means of their definite rational principles, nature must work in the same way, but with an art which is much more enduring and full of wisdom in that it works with greater effectiveness and makes more beautiful faculties. But if are -which produces works that are not alive and inttoduces forms that are neither primary nor whole -has living rational principles, there is all the more reason to suppose that rational principles are present in nature, which does generate living faculties and produce forms that are primary and whole. For what after all is human art It is a sort of nature handling matter from the out• side. And what is nature? It is art molding matter from within, as though the carpenter were in the wood. But if human art, though it is outside the matter, is nevertheless so well attuned and so dose to making the work that it can bring definite works to completion in conformity with definite ideas, how much more then will the are of nature be able to achieve this, the art which does not touch the outer surface of matter with hands or other external tools in the way the geometer's soul touches the dust as he tracts figures on the ground, but rather as the geometer's mind fashions imaginary matter within? For just as the geometer's mind, when it ponders in itself the rational principles of figures, forms the phantasy from within with the figures' images, and through this phantasy forms too the phantastic spirit, and does so without toil or deliberation, so in nature's art a certain divine wisdom by way of the intellectual rational principles fills with natural seeds the life-giving and motive force linked to it; and through this force it forms with utmost case the matter too from within. What is a work of art? The mind of the artist in disjunct matter. What is a work of nature The mind of nature in conjunct matter. The order of a work of nature, therefore, is more like the order in the art of nature than the order of a human artifact is like the art of man. This is to the degree that matter is closer to nature than to man and nature has greater sway over matter than man does. How then can you hesitare to posit in nature definite rational principles of definite works? Or rather, just as human art, which works through contact with matter’s surface and fabricares by way of contingent rational principles, produces likewise only contingent forms, so the art of nature, it is evident, because it gives birth to or extracts substantial forms from matter's depths, operares entirely by way of rational principles that are essential and permanent. A large number of living faculties, both on earth and in water, are born by putrefaction alone without any corporeal seed. An even larger number come from seeds that have been ejaculared to some distance by an animal and then germinare considerably latter in part with the application of some external warmth, in part without any apparent assistance. All plants and trees, though they are daily propagared by sowing or planting, yet daily too in many places they are born spontaneously without seed or corporeal bud (and I omit that many philosophers chink that ani• mals which are even more perfect are born from the earth after extraordinaty floods). Yet certain definite faculties have to come from certain definite seeds, and what passes from potency into act has to be brought into this act by a cause that already contains such an act within itself, or one that is equivalent or more eminent. Nor should one suppose it enough if the universal and remote cause were merely more eminent, otherwise certain of the most imperfect causes here with us would be able to produce certain superlatively perfect effects, (those] in the power of the celestials. All these points signify that present everywhere through earth  and water in an artful and vital nature are the spiritual and lifegiving seeds of every faculties. csc seeds can generate of themselves wherever bodily seeds are missing; they can rewarm seeds that have been left behind by animals; and from one withered grape pip, whose nature is single and lowly, they can bring forth the vine with all its variety, order, and value to man, namely with their varied, rational, and splendid powers. ,c same vital nature draws out from the depths of matter, where corporeal substances do not penetrate, the substantial forms of the elements. Moreover, it rakes the elemental qualities, which of themselves can only burn or freeze or whatever, and adds to them the precious variety of colors and shapes and the vigor of life. Moreover, when fire results from the collision of told bodies  where no fire existed before except in potency (and that potency fat removed indeed from act), the living nature generates fire through the rational principle of fire which is efficacious in the ex• creme. And wherever accidental qualities alone appear to contribute some faculties to generation, yet are incapable of doing so them• selves without a substance in accord with the effect, it is that living nature that plays the tole of the mother substance. It can raise up compound bodies which in themselves are inert and worthless be• cause of their earthy or watery density, and get them to perform certain remarkable actions, even to allure and strengthen men's souls; and this it cannot do without the power of a rational soul. and a very powerful one at that. For by the power of this wise and enduring nature, which h:.S been infused in these compound bodies, the herb hietobotanum (as the Magi tell us) helps doctors to divine the nature of an illness, while agare improves eyesight, dulls the effects of poison, and endows us with strength and eloquence; diamond by its presence deprives a magnet of its power of attraction; torneli:m stops a flux of blood and mitigates fits of anger; onyx sparks fits of anger and causes nightmares; and total, according to Mettodorus and Zoto:.Ster, removes the terrors of madness and drives away lightning and hail.! Certainly, this nature presides over our souls and (their] tempestuous emotions and by its power they are made what they are. [But] it has to be infused in the lowest and most insignificant bodies too, so that it may raise them with itself, over and against their own natures, to perform the actions of higher beings. Strato and Chrysippus will acknowledge that such a life permeates the world, but they go on to claim that it is the highest God. Platonists will deny this, because above this life which belongs  to another and exists in another there h:.S to be the life that exists of and in itself. But the life of any one of the world's spheres is no less close to its sphere than man's rational soul to his body. So the life of a sphere, whether of some part of it or of the whole, is neither that primary life nor is it God. For God on high is highest unity. According to the Platonists, it is perhaps possible for some sort of plurality to issue directly from that unity, but certainly not such a great diversity and discord of mutually destructive qualities. Again, no faculties evil or ugly comes dose at all to the highest goodness and beauty; but many evil and ugly faculties occur in the proximity of matter. Furthermore, if God is being itself, He cannot be the form of matter. For such a form is nor being itself but the rational principle of being [namely essence). And because God is being so absolute (if I may put it like that) that He is not in any particular essence, much less is He in matter. Again, since God is the primary efficient cause, He enacts all His acts first;0 but the form of matter does not enact all faculties first. For the compound [as a whole] acts first, nor a part of the compound. Furthermore, the parts of a compound are in a kind of potency with regard to the act of the whole. But in God there is no potency with regard to a still further act. So God is not made one living being from that act and from matter, as the followers of Amaury de Bene stupidly suppose. A living being that is rational moves of itself; so it can move or not move, and move now faster now slower. But such a being will not persist in continuous and regular movement unless by the law of some higher being which is not liable to change at all. So God cannot be the soul of any one sphere, lest a single living creature be formed from Him and from the sphere and be compelled to have a leader still above it. But would we then concede that the life of the sphere is angel 0 and that natural forms issue from the ideas of angelic mind~ Nor at all. For just as a body is prepared by such or such an essence for such or such a life, so is it necessarily prepared by such a life for such a mind. Thus Plato in his imams says that God joined mind to soul and soul to body, u as though lucid mind could only be joined to opaque body by way of transparent soul, just as a bright body is joined to a dense by means of a diaphanous or transparent body. TIis is in order that what has light of itself and displays it to others may be joined to what both lacks and blocks light by means of some middle nature, which, though It may lack light of itself, nonetheless does not block the entry of light. But if the activity of our mind is perfected by a certain separation from matter, then the activity of angelic mind, which is perfect in the genus of intellect, is fat removed from matter. But since angel itself is no faculties other than mind, and since for the very reason it is mind it shuns matter when it acts, in what manner will angel's substance adhere closely to matter~ le is appropriate that, just as individual human minds make contact with and move their individual bodies by means of their own souls-that is, their vital forces -so the general minds of the spheres embrace and guide their general bodies by means of their souls. For in this way the spheres will have life implanted in them, and [yet] the divine minds will by no means be cast down from their high estate. Above the lives of the spheres, which are simultaneously intellectual and animate, will be the angelic lives which are solely intellectual. Above them will be God, the life of lives. Moreover, if angelic mind is indivisible, un• changeable and completely above time and place, there will be no reason either for it to accord with body which is divisible, change• able and subject to time and place, or for it to make such forms in body unless soul intercedes. For soul, because it is indivisible and above place, is formed or guided by angel; but because it is change· able and partly partakes of time, it is compatible with matter. It takes the forms received from on high and leads them in itself down into changeable and temporal nature through which they cross over with greatest case into the body ( which is also change• able); once there, they become divisible in it. It is the view of the Platonists that God formed angels by Him•  self, but souls by means of angels, and matter by means of souls; and that forms gradually degenerate from the highest life and act, until eventually when they appear in matter they are no longer re• ally alive or capable of activity. Certainly, in moving from God to angel, forms pass from a single essence into multiple qualities; and from angel to soul, from rest to a productive motion; and from soul to body, from vital and active motion to the passive change· ability of mortal nature. If life is innate in earth and water and yet this life is neither God (Iest unlimited act be assigned to the lowliest potency) nor angel (lest mind in all its clarity be juxtaposed to the most murky of natures), it must be, therefore, that earth and water have souls by whose art incc these [two] spheres are adorned with the most precious embellishments. In the same way the little souls of earth and water animals, with the soul of their own sphere to guide them, paint and shape their little bodies most delightfully by way of the seeds implanted in them. One soul suffices for the earthy sphere, for the sphere is entirely  one with all its parts in one continuous mass. One soul too suffices for the sphere of water. Yee the twin souls of the two spheres must differ from each other in [ their] species. This is evident from the fact that the natures of their bodies differ in species, in qualities and in effects. If such spheres, circumscribed though they are and fat removed because of their grossness from the purity of spirit, are alive with their own souls, then the higher spheres, which are much purer and more ample and by whose nurturing earth and water give birth, are still more alive. Air has its own soul and nature for the same reason that earth and water have theirs. Similarily, the eight spheres of the heavens have their eight souls. For such was the number of the heavens according to the ancients. Many animals exist on the earth that have their own souls distinct from the common soul of the earth. For they move locally as the earth does not; they remain alive even when they are not in contact with the earth, which stones and planes ( deriving life as they do from the soul of the earth, not from their own soul) do not do; and they can lift themselves from the earth on high either in Right or in buildings or machines. In water too are many creatures living with their own souls. If earth and water have been made perfect and beautiful by God, why may not air and nrc contain many souls besides their common souls, and contain their own animals too? Argue the same for the celestial spheres where the stats, since they differ among themselves in quantity, light, power and movement and individually perform their own revolutions, have souls that differ in species too. Now the stats adorn the heavens just as the creatures of earth and water adorn the earth and the water. These celestial animals we see clearly because of the abundance of their light. The creatures of earth and water we also see because they are dose to us and with their density they present themselves to our eyes. But the airy and fiery creatures we do not see, because we do nor see for that matter the elements of fire and air, given that they do not appear to earthly eyes even with the aid of brightest light, and they have no density of mass. The soul of the earth must be rational since certain of earth's  animals do not lack reason, and since especially the works of the earth are more beautiful than men's works. If the soul of this lowest sphere has not been robbed of reason, the souls of the higher spheres are also not without reason. In earth and water the differ• enc parts are distinguished such that some of the earthly bodies are less pure, others are very pure. The former have Irrational souls, the larrer rational. The same occurs in water, where Irrational fishes live in the muddy parts, but where water daemons (Orpheus calls them Ncreids) live in certain rarefied water vapors such as those in the cloudy air. TIeIt bodies are sometimes seen by shatper eyes, especially in Persia and Africa, according to Zoroaster  Porphyry adds both that chose daemons in whose bodies fire abounds besides the water's vapor are only seen, and that this happens in the Ease and South: but that daemons in bodies where there is a great deal of earth besides can also be touthed. Instances had occurred, he says, in his own day among the Tuscans. But in all the spheres higher than water no animals exist that do not pos• sess reason, because chose spheres are not divided into dense parts and rare parts, and whatever exists there is fat purer than watery vapors. At this point permit me to exchange a few words with the Pythagoreans. Since every large plurality has to be reduced to a small number,  and the small number to a few unities and the few unities to one unity, the numberless host of souls dwelling in any one of the world's spheres has to be led back to the few most important souls dwelling in that sphere, let us say to the twelve principal souls. Why chiefly to twelve princes? Because, just as the single body of the world according to the ancients possesses twelve limbs and each of these contains many joints, so the single soul of the world contains twelve souls and these contain many more. But the twelve souls contain many more to the extent that first they ton• rain twelve principal souls. Why? Because, since the soul of each sphere has been selected from the first gtoup of twelve souls and accommodared to its sphere, it is reasonable that it should have recourse a second time to the number twelve, the mark of which number we have in the first and in the last sphere. In the first sphere across the zodiac we see twelve sidereal animals. In each of these animals shines a principal stat, like that animal's heart painted in the sky. The soul of the whole constellation lives life in that heart. This is where the Pythagoreans, accordingly, locates the twelve divine souls: in Aties' heart, Pallas; in Taurus', Venus; in Gemini's, Phocbus "particular";" in Cancer's, Mercury; in Leo's, Jupiter "particular"; in VItgo's, Ceres; in Libra's, Vulcan; in Stor• pio's, Mats; in Sagittatius', Diana; in Capritorn's, Vesta; in Aquat• ius', Juno; and in Pisces', Neptune. Also in the last sphere, earth, there are the twelve lives of men. Men live life by way of reason which is assigned to the brain, of Irascibility which is assigned to the heart, and of desire which is attributed to the liver. If anyone is alleged to use none of these faculties he will not even be breaching. If someone lives by reason alone, he will no longer be a man. Or rather, it is impossible for a soul joined to a body to proceed by reason alone. A person cannot use the faculty of Irascibility alone, because it is always subservient to reason or to desire. He cannot even use desire alone, for desire is always strengthened by corrupted reason or by irrationality. So a person must proceed by way of all, or (at least] of two, of these faculties. The first type of human life employs reason more, Irascibility less, desire lease; the second, reason more, desire less, Irascibility least; the third, Irascibility more, reason less, desire lease; the fourth, Irascibility more, desire less, reason least; the fifth, desire much, reason litde, Irascibility barely at all; and the sixth, desire much, Irascibility little, reason barely. So from the use commonly of the three faculties emerge six kinds of life. A further six are produced from the use of Uust] two faculties: in the first, reason rules over Irascibility; in the second, the reverse; in the third, reason rules over desire; in the fourth, the reverse; in the fifth, Irascibility rules over desire; and in the sixth, the reverse. If the number twelve is seen in the two spheres at either extreme of the cosmos, then it will be observed in the intermediate spheres. To return to what we commenced a little eatlier, in order, there- fore, let us bring the host of souls living in any one sphere back to the twelve principal souls living in that same sphere; and again, lee us accept that there are twelve princes in any one of the twelve spheres, for according to the ancients such is the number of the spheres in the cosmos. Let us refer the twelve princes back to the twelve general souls of those spheres; and in rum refer those twelve souls of the spheres back to the one soul of matter as itself one.0 But since soul participates in mind, and above a participating nature must be a nature that is complete in itself, so the genus of souls is lifted up to the free [unpareitipating} minds, and these minds finally to the one mind. This one mind, being both one and mind, must be raised to the absolute One, which is not one this or one that ( one mind, say, or one soul) but the One itself, what Pythagoras calls the universal Apollo. For he interprets Apollo as l,aplou, meaning "simple," or as a•pol/0, meaning "cut off from the many." He calls it tagatho, the Good itself, because the goodness and perfection of each thing consists in its unity, so that, if goodness and unity are the same in nature, then above nature the prime One and the prime Good are the same too. Therefore the prime One and Good rules over the one mind next to it; the one mind rules over the many minds, firstly perchance over the twelve leading minds perhaps, then over the twelve groups of twelve minds under them, and then over the multitude of minds and finally over the single world soul. The one world soul rules over the twelve souls of the twelve spheres. These twelve souls rule over the twelve twelves of souls. The soul of each sphere, in other words, rules over the twelve most important souls in its sphere. Then these twelve rule over numberless souls; for in any sphere the twelve princely souls govern that sphere's other souls. But this choir of Musts sings and dances perpetually, as Orpheus says, in mutual measures to the command of Apollo himself: "It is you who rule and temper the whole heaven with your melodious lyre." But we have conversed enough with the Pythagoreans. Let us return to the Platonist order as planned. We have provided one argument that the world's spheres are  alive, Let us proceed to another. Since we see the world's spheres are moved and we suppose there must be movers of them, and since moreover we know that one sphere cannot be above another or some movers be above others to infinity, we are forced to admit that one of the spheres is moved first. If it moves first, we can be sure that its principle of motion is within. Certainly the first faculties that is hot or told is heating or tooling from the heat or told within, as we indicated above. For we established that what possesses a given property from another must always be referred to what has the property of itself. But if some of the world's smallest bodies possess in themselves in a way the powers of their own motions and actions -and this appears in the parts of the elements and in plants and animals -then all the more so do the spheres of the world in all their amplitude possess in themselves the principles of their own revolutions. Those principles are intimately their own, and the spheres are more closely joined to them than our bodies are joined to our souls, since motion is more natural and more efficient to the extent that what is moved is the more closely joined to the mover. But the motion of the heavens is more distant from violence than other motions, more natural and more efficient. But what then are chose principles? Surely they are not some qualities? Are we to suppose that just as the parts of the elements seem to be moved by heaviness and lightness and to act through heat and told, so the world's spheres are turned found by such qualities? Certainly not. Because quality is limited by its location and parts and is confined to one particular lump of matter, it acts too in a limited way and it becomes exhausted. The result is that it cannot move always or in the same way, and each quality does one job and aims at one single goal. What does heat do except produce heat, and told? Lightness only lifts faculties and heaviness drags them down. So quality will never of its own nature produce some effect that is the contrary of its principal action; never of its own accord return whence it departed; never un· aided depart from the place it has naturally returned to. But heaven is always moved regularly, and produces different and mu-tually contrary effects, and preparts inferior matter for this diversity in contrary ways. It assumes various configurations and it has no fixed limit in its circuit; but if you mark a point on the back of heaven, every part of heaven will reach that point an un• limited number of times and depart again with utmost case and not through violence of any kind. For what is violent is neither long-lasting nor always the same and ordered. Furthermore, since heaven revolves with contrary movements at one and the same time, if it were ruled by quality, then it would be moved by contrary qualities. But contrary qualities and natures cannot occur there where there is no strife or destruction. Again, since nature is determined, and thus cannot desire an end which is undetermined and variable like movement, it moves only for the sake of rest. But circular movement is not in itself directed towards rest. So it is not started by nature, nor, if it comes to rest, is it stopped by nature. Furthermore, quality extended in body cannot turn back upon itself, since it is bound to body. So how will quality give heaven the power of revolving on itself when it does not have in itself the power of turning back upon itself? Again, since body does no faculties through its own nature but through quality, and quality does not provide that power to body by its own motion, but only to the extent that it is itself moved by some other source, then if some quality moves heaven, it is itself in the meantime being moved by some other source. What is it that moves it? Is it God? Surely not. For the first  cause, since it infinitely exceeds all faculties, is closely relatd to no one body, but is equally common to all bodies and yet independent of them all. For if God were the mover of some pareitulat body, He would no longer be the mover of all. So as the governor of all, He is not the exclusive governor of some particular body. Yet, as we declared, the spheres need movers who are as close to them as possible. But because the spheres are distinct from each other and moved by different movements, they severally need their own movers, since mover and movement have to be proportionate. The view of those people who distribute movers to the spheres in such a way that they assign God to the first sphere and the other intellects to the remainder is unacceptable. B Since distribution must occur according to proportion, and just as the spheres are in mutual harmony in their nature and order, so God and the intellects will then be in mutual harmony. God will be superior to the other intellects only insofar as the first sphere is superior to the rest, and He will not be measureless. Furthermore, He will be compounded both from a common nature by virtue of which He will be in harmony with the others, and from His own nature by means of which He will be distinguished [from them]. Moreover, if God is goodness itself and this goodness moves  every faculties as the object of desire moves the appetite, God moves heaven as the final cause. But body is not moved extrinsically towards an objective unless by some internal form which is desirous of its end and which brings about motion. Therefore present in heaven is a form desirous of the prime goodness and which brings about motion. This yeatning is not blind like that of stones, nor Irrational like that of beasts. For how would a yeatning so close to the prime truth and wisdom be blind or Irrational, especially since it moves its own body in a more orderly way than our reason moves ours~ So God must not move heaven ptoximarely; rather a form does, which belongs specifically to heaven and which is pos-sessed of life and reason and is desirous of divine goodness. But if anyone were to say the heavens are moved in a certain harmonious balance, as once the brazen spheres of Atchimedes revolved, ~ he would be forced to admit that the tempering itself is no less sub-stantial, living and rational than the tempering whereby the limbs of earthly animals are moved, inasmuch as it is closer to the prime substance, life and reason, and appears more even in both its nature and movements. Can heaven's mover be angel then~ Certainly not. For the celestial life itself is the most intimate [mover) of heaven and revolves in a way together with its body. Angel is neither the intimate mover nor is it moved; for above the mobile mover must be an· other mover that is motionless. Angel furthermore is completely at rest. But from what is entirely at rest no sudden or varied motion can arise. If angel is completely at rest, but heaven is moveable by another, they assuredly need some mean that is mobile through it• self. For next in succession after what is utterly at rest is some• faculties that is mobile of itself; and succeeding this is some faculties moveable by another. This is because what is self-moving shares the fact that it is changed with what is changed by another; but that it rules itself, because it remains in its own nature and does not descend from its abode, it shares with what is utterly at rest. What then is it that moveable of itself revolves the heavens next to  it? It is no faculties other than soul. For soul is both moveable of itself and bestows on bodies the imprint of its movement. Even were we to say that some remote mover moves the heavens, yet it will not bestow the act of motion on the heavens before it has imparted an inner moving power to them. s Such a power must not be coextensive with the heavens or else it would separate from itself, and thus be unable to bestow on heaven the power of perpetually returning on itself. So it will be indivisible, yet not, like the point, confined to dimensions, because then it could nor freely rum itself and the dimensions in a circular motion. But it is totally present everywhere in the whole of heaven in order that it may move the whole in the most efficient way. The power, therefore, that is joined [to heaven] is indivisible [and] everywhere free like the ra-tional soul. Because of its presence, heaven is alive. Its movement is life-giving since it gives life to all. Finally, since in animals chose organs are alive by means of  which souls materials living things, who will doubt that heaven is alive, seeing that a life uses it as an instrument for generating liv-ing faculties. Isn't movement that is spontaneous, if I may cull the term, a sign of inner life wherever it occurs? This is particularly true in the case of natural circular movement. For what is moved more spontaneously than what reverts naturally to itself and turns itself on a natural axis and within a natural periphery? So life is intrinsic to no body more than it is to the world's spheres. Nor should one doubt that one animate being is fashioned out of the spheres and the divine souls. For, since it is proper for matter to receive form, but for form to embrace and rule matter, and since this all occurs more completely there where matter and form alike are more eminent, who will deny that one indissoluble living being is fashioned our of the souls that are more eminent than ours, and out of the spheres that are more simple and lasting than our bod-ies, and that contain, rule and materials our bodies? Aren't chose bodies, because of their marvelous simplicity and tenuity, almost spiritual? They are more readily animated, therefore, in the presence of spirits than sulfur flares up in the presence of fire. For the most excellent matter is so closely joined to the most excellent, that is, to the intellectual, form that they can never be dissolved. Compound bodies, the further they depart from the discord of elemental qualities and the closer they approach to the harmony of the heavenly bodies, the more capable they become of life and of cognition. If this is so, then undoubtedly the most capable of life and of cognition are the heavenly bodies. The genus of minds is higher than the heavens, and more akin to them than to the earth. Since many minds, therefore, have been joined as forms to earthly bodies, necessarily even more minds, and earlier and more completely, have been joined as forms to heavenly bodies than to earthly bodies. Platonists believe, as I have indicated, that not only the heavens  but the elements too are alive. Since they see all the world's spheres and many compound faculties which are linked to them are moved by an inner movement without any faculties external impelling them, they conclude that souls are presence in them. But if someone were to ask about the ascent and descent of the elements and of compound objects, the Platonists will reply that the ascending and descending too is brought about through the soul; through the soul, I say, of their own sphere, which recalls the small parts of its sphere to itself :is a magnet attraction. That is also why the motion of a stone falling from on high accelerates the closer it approaches earth, and why the motion of an ascending flame burns more ravenously the closer it approaches heaven. Since the soul of the sphere attracts the more vehemently the closer it is, the world's soul too attracts for the ~me reason. If people, when they perceive the motion of a piece of iron, were not to see the magnet, they would suppose that the iron were being moved by itself when it was being attracted by the magnet. Just so do those who do not understand about the souls of the spheres believe that all the little bodies move of their own accord. Clearly, since no craftsman's mind can move his hands or his tools as deftly as chose little bodies are moved in the world, necessarily chose bodies are moved and ruled not just by unskillful quality but also by nature's skillfulness. Again, the natural movement of the elements is what does not trespass beyond the bounds of nature and of natural place; in other words, It is an everlasting circular movement in its place and sphere perfectly resembling the sphere's natural shape. Fire and air move in a circle like the Moon, as the revolution of comets shows. Water moves in a circle, ceaselessly flowing back. If earth were moved, as Hegesias claimed,l it would be moved in a circle. It stays still, most people believe, on the surface. [But) its parts in a way make a circle around the center of the world insofar as they pack themselves together on all sides around the center continuously pressing in. But ascent or descent are not strictly speaking natural motion, but a sudden restoration by way of a straight line to a natural location and motion, a restoration which, because it is ended by anothcr and is always directed along a singular path, dearly shows us that the parts of the elements are not moved of their own accord. For then they would also come to rest of their own accord and would not always follow the same path; and water would be able occasionally not to make the air close to it told or not pour down in a precipitous cascade. For, although the souls of the spheres always keep the same tenor, yet we must not think that lItdc souls-the powers, that is, of the elemental parts, if they are present in them as motive forces-are going to preserve such an order, seeing that our own souls cannot preserve it. But the growth of plants and tocks comes from the earth's soul; so they grow only as long as they ding to the earth. The bodies of men and animals live separated from the spheres because they have their own souls. This is cleat from their shape which is protected by various instruments fundamentally different from the shape of the spheres. le is cleat too from their composition than completely  differs from the composition of the spheres. Mover relates to mover as object moved to object moved. TIus soul relates to soul as body to body. So bodies that are separated among themselves because of location, nature, shape, quantity and movement must also have a species and soul that are separate; bodies that are joined, a species and soul that are joined. Yet above individual souls is the one soul of the world. For  there has to be one living work of the one living craftsman. le is not one and alive except through one life. It does not have one life unless it has one soul. Since, as the majority argue, one prime matter in itself unformed lies concealed in all the spheres, it is proper that its soul be one. What is it that is responsible for making the limbs of the world, though they are in opposition to each other, nonetheless work together and variously share their powers, unless it is that one soul tempers the humors, however diverse, of this huge living being, and rakes the spatially separated limbs and the quality of life and of motion and joins them in concord? How else could the lower parts follow the bidding of the higher, and all the limbs of the world be in sympathy, so to speak, with each other, except by sharing one common nature? One nature comes from one soul. This divine animal should not be any less united than any other animal, seeing that it is the most mighty of all. If among the other animals, therefore, any body whatsoever is governed by a single soul of its own, afortiori the limbs of the world animal are bound into one by a single soul. If this soul's relation• ship to its body is the same as our soul's to our body, then it is present in its entirety in any given part of the world in a way that is no different from our soul's being present in its entirety in any part of our body; otherwise it could nor bind the universe perfectly together, or vivify and move it. Soul relates to nature as nature to body. So just as a universal nature exists everywhere in the universal body, so a universal soul exists everywhere in that universal nature. • BOOK IV • CHAPTER l •  TIat the souls of the spheres are rational is shown by the fact    that the disposition of the world's movements always tends towards the better and the more beautiful. For just as the motion which is extremely swift, independent and long-lasting comes  from the life within, so the astonishing orderliness of that motion  and its supremely skillful progression come from the art of that  life, an art of superlative wisdom. For what always guides the  spheres via the same means to the same end is not a necessity lacking life, as it vulgarly appears, but a perfect art and blessed wisdom, which, since it does not err in its deliberating, as mortals  customarily do, does not wander in its motion and activity. Finally,  another argument for us that heaven is moved by an intelligence is  that the body of heaven by its motions so orders the elements and  disposes compound faculties that intellectual souls are poured into  /  compound bodies. Now these souls are fat superior to the heavenly bodies. So heaven's corporeal nature, since of itself it neither  does any faculties nor disposes any faculties that goes beyond its own species, in this doing and disposing, where it assembles perfectly in  accordance with the species (or idea) of a mind, for a surety is led  by the divine mind, as a tool is guided by a craftsman. This mind  is indeed present in heaven's soul, since the soul of the most eminent of bodies is the most eminent of souls.  According to the Magi, the world has three chief rulers,    Otomasis, MItris and Atimanis, that is God, mind and soul. To  God belongs unity, to mind order, and to soul movement. From  God alone comes the prime unity in the world of the parts and of  the whole. From mind by the power of God comes the order  of the united p:ms. From soul by the power of the higher two  comes the movement of this ordered creation. Through itself soul  moves the world in a changeable way, through mind it moves it in  an orderly way, and through the eternal unity of God Himself it  continues forever in this single task. Thus, as I have said, these  three rulers seem to leave three imprints in the world. Apparently,    Plato was referring to this in his letter to King Dionysus in a p:issagc I have cleared at some length in my De "more.0 I will pass over the fact that any natural species has its existence and unity from God, its structure from God through mind, and its perpetuity from both; but from soul and heaven is multiplied in individual beings and subject to change. For mind and soul, because they are directly created by a cause which is altogether immobile by way of its substance, are accordingly entirely immutable in substance. But the natural species, because they emanate from unchanging causes – this is, from God and mind by way of causes that move when they act-that is, by way of the souls and the heavens-are also mutable in a way in substance, although by the gift of the unchanging causes and through the continuous succession of individual faculties they appear to be perpetual. For the mobile c:iuses' perpetuity of motion comes from the s:i.me source whence the causes' effects derive the continuous succession of (their] generation. Not only Platonists but all the Aristotelians too say that the heavenly spheres have souls. Aristotle teaches this in the De caelo Book II, in the Physics Books VII and VIII, in the De anima Book II, and in the Metaphysics Book XI, as does Aristotle’s pupil Theophrastus in his De ,ado. Avicenna and Algazales have fully confirmed it. n Augustine in his EnchItidioH and Thomas Aquinas in his Totra Gentiles Book JPS teach us that as fat as Christian doctrine is concerned it is unimportant whether celescial bodies do or do not have souls. Although it was obviously agreed among the Platonists that the  spheres of the elements were alive, yet the ancient Aristotelians did not discuss the issue. But several more recent thinkers doubt it on the grounds that the elements appear both to have been created for the sake of the objects compounded from them and to be inferior to the compounds to the extent that they are closer to matter. To this the Platonists will counter that the spheres of the elements in their entirety were established for the sake of the whole world,  not for the sake of this or that compound, but that the particles of the elements, which are cur off from the entirety of the whole de· menr and are mingled into this or that compound body, are mingled together for the sake of that little body. And although the qualities of their unchanging may indeed be close to prime matter, yet the elements in their entirety, because they are counted in the order of the principal parts of the world, are much closer to the form of the whole world, to the universal model and plan of the highest craftsman, and to the divine influences of the celestial minds and spheres. These influences flow down into the unchanging and into the little bodies compounded from them just as they flow through the elements in their entirety. And in this way the spheres of the elements become receptacles worthy of rational souls. In fire and air, moreover, because of their location and the  transparency dey have in common wid the heavens, are particular parts which respond as it were to the constellations directly opposite them, and which, ennobled as they are by certain unmediated influences, are sufficiently prepared to receive minds. But the grosser parts either of water and canh, or of fire and air diffused in earth, being separated from their proper spheres, do not deserve thinking souls, both because they have foregone the dignity of their spheres, and because they are not preserving their own simplicity and purity owing to the impact of external bodies. But if they are mixed together with great diligence to the point that they are able to recover from the long-lasting tempering of qualities a certain uniformity like de uniformity of the spheres, then they do result first in certain wonderful activities in compounded bodies, next in life in plants, then in sense, finally in reason. But if anyone wants to know the names of the divine souls, he  should be aware that the theology of Orpheus divides the souls of the spheres in such a way that each has a twin power, one concerned with knowing, the other in the sphere's body with giving life and ruling. So Orpheus calls the one power in the element of earth Pluto, the other Proserpina; in water, Oceanus and Thetis, in air, Jupiter Lord of the lightening bolt  and Juno; in fire, Phanes and Autora; in the soul of the sphere of the Moon, Bacchus Litnites and the Must Thalia. Again, in the soul of the sphere of Mercury, the one power is Bacchus Silenus, the other Euterpe; in that of Venus, (Bacchus} Lysius and Erato; in that of the Sun, (Bacchus] Trieteritus [and] Melpomene; in that of Mats, [Bac• chus] B:SSareus and Clio; in that of Jupiter, {Bacchus] Sabasius and Terpsithore; in that of Saturn, (Bacchus] Amphiecus and Polymnia; and in that of the eighth sphere, (Bacchus] Peritionius and Urania. But Orpheus calls the first power in the soul of the world Bacchus Eribtomus, and the second, the Must Calliope. Accordingly, in Orpheus' theme a particular Bacchus rules over the individual Musts,  and the powers of the Musts, drunken by the nectar of knowledge divine, are signified by his name. Thus the nine Musts along with the nine Bacchuses together celebrate their ecstatic rites around the single figure of Apollo, that is, around the splendor of the invisible Sun. But this is enough about the names of the divine souls. Let me briefly bring this whole discussion to an end by commenting, in the manner of the ancients, that people are making utter fools of themselves: both chose who declare that the impure parts of the elements from which animals are made do have life and reason, while denying them to the elements themselves in their entirety and purity (as though the part were superior to the whole); and chose who maintain likewise that the world lacks life and sense, although it gives life to plants that do not spring from seed, and gives sense to animals that are not born from toitus. We conclude then that there are three levels of rational souls: in 0 first place is the single world soul; in second, the twelve souls of the twelve spheres; and in third, the many souls which are ton• rained in the individual spheres. All which pertains to the souls of the spheres and here set forth from the point of view of the  Platonists will be confirmed only when a council of Christian theologians, after careful examination, agrees upon them. For Plato too in the Epi0is, speaking in his own person,  makes the following comments concerning the matters under dis• cussion: "It is impossible for the earth, the heavens, and all the stats and the masses they comprise, to perform their yearly, monthly, and daily revolutions with such exquisite rationality and to render all faculties good for us all, unless soul is present neat them or is in them individually.": II : The souls of spheres move the spheres in accordance with the law of nature; they move them in a circle because they are themselves circles. How then do celestial soul.~ move their spheres? According to the  Platonists in the same way as your soul moves your body: through desire. The desire in a celestial sphere too is aroused by reaction; and reflection there by its soul's fatal law. TIus Plato says in his book, ,e Statesman in fact and inborn desire moves the heavens."~0 He apparently adopted this view from Zoroaster, from whom emanates all the wisdom of the ancient theologians. For in speaking of the heavens, he says: "It is borne along by the sempiternal will; it is always traversing the works of ncccssity." We will under• stand this clearly if we consider the order of faculties in the following way. TIcrc is some faculties said to be above the All and some faculties said  to be under the All. What is said to be above the All is God, who cannot properly be the All, because He is the utterly simple unity above number. Under the All are the particular objects here. Now some mean must exist between what is above the All and what is under the All. But that mean is the All itself. the whole and the accumulated mass of all faculties. But this mean will be a threefold All, or a threefold whole. The first All derives directly from God's unity itself. To the extent that it can become so, therefore, it must necessarily be united, since it is made most like unity itself. But some faculties can be united in three ways: in essence, in a point in space, in a moment in time: in essence, that it may be a single substance, not compounded from several substances; in a point in space, rhac it may not to be divided into many parts by virtue of which it would be forcibly splintered into many points in space; in a moment in time, that it may find in a twinkling of an eye what· ever it can ever possess and not be different in different moments of time. Hence that All, which comes immediately from God and is most like Him, is united in each of these three ways. This is an• gel, which although insofar as it depends on another it can be said to be mutable in a way, yet because it is created immediately proximare to the infinite immutability of God and is turned towards God without an intermediary emerges as completely immutable. The second All follows. Because it depends on the One by a second intention, it is already losing one mode of unity. Jc retains the [other) two: it remains one in essence and in a point in space, but it becomes different in the moments of time. Such is soul. The third All is the matter of the world, which is one in substance, but not only varies in terms of moments, like soul, but is also scattered over different points of space. In this downward progression why is time found before space? First, because time accompanies any spiritual action, while space is the companion of body, and so time comes closer to spirit and its capacity to act than space does; second, because one must descend from unity to multiplicity by stages. But as often as a faculties's of sense is subject to spatial multiplicity, thus often does its activity sustain temporal plurality; but not the other way about. For cs• sense can excel activity in unity and perfection, but not the contrary. The world's various members are said to be not the All but under the All. So angel contains within itself the rational principles of all faculties, all the principles, I say, in habit and act together. Next, soul contains them all, but in habit not in act. Matter ton• rains them all in potency, yet not in habit or act; but by way of succession it sustains all faculties. Soul itself must really be all faculties in some manner. Zoroaster says about it: "It holds within the many plenitudes of the world's bosom and folds."° For if it is the mean between the highest and the lowest faculties, it must contain within itself the gifts and images of those above but the powers and models of those below. But in that part whereby it communicates with angelic mind it becomes like angel, in its other part un• like. So in their minds the souls of the spheres contain all the ideas simultaneously in habit and in acc. In their lowest powers, those that move bodies, the souls again have all the seeds for gen• crating, but they have them together in possession and habit, but not in acc. TIc middle pare, that is the reason, follows mind. This is because the bodies of the spheres' souls, being most perfect and in need of no faculties virtually, are sufficiently ruled by the soul's lowest part alone. So the middle pare of the celestial souls, though mobile by nature, because it lives in leisure from corporeal labor, has been absorbed by mind and becomes stable. In our case, however, because of the needs of our body, the  middle part is moved too like the lowest part, compelled by the difficult and c:xrremcly laborious cask of looking after the body. According to Plotinus,~~ some movement is apparent in a way even in the rational [middle] part of the celestial souls. For since that pare Aows out from God, from the unity of all, down through its own unity which is its mind's head, and then down through its mind which is the reason's head, it also flows back through its mind and its unity up to God, the unity of all. Since this is so, first it naturally desires God Himself, second it understands Him, third it loves Him with an intellectual love, and fourth it attains Him in a union of love. But action which proceeds to a certain end through intermediary stages the Platonists refer to as movement, and, if it takes place in time, as temporal movement; but if it occurs in an instant, they call it eternal movement. Such is the movement in the rCSon of the celestial souls. Although the middle part of these souls, turned back as it is towards mind, may see all the rational principles at the same time, yet these souls' lowest pare, being most akin to changeable bodies, does not have sufficient power to be able in one act to be borne into the seeds of all faculties. Yee it yearns to be borne into them all in act, lest all the seeds are in it potentially for naught. Thus it is by way of repeated striving that it is borne into them, and in act it attains now these seeds, now chose; but it loses earlier seeds in act when it hurries on to others. So it does not embrace all seeds at the same time, but is always striving for them all. So it is always coursing onwards. Its course is the first motion. The span of this course, how• ever, is the first time. The world runs to that course. The times of the world flow to that time. I believe this is Proteus himself, as he appears in Orpheus, always changing his shape. But since the seeds are determined in a fixed number and the soul is always hurrying onwards, the soul traverses them all in a fixed interval of time. Having done this, it seems to me, it must either rest, or run back step by seep a second time through them all, and reweave the same web of generation in the world. This was Zoroaster's view, who believed that when exactly the same causes returned at some point in time, the same effects would similarly recur. With this argument he and many others among his successors have upheld the resurrection of human bodies. But Platonists have claimed that to be completed the circuit of the universe takes an interval of thirty-six thousand solar years, what they designate the Great or Tosmit Yeat. Mercury (Trismegistus] calls the ending of this period "the old age of the world,'' Plato, in Tiit Staresa, "the restoration of the world." Here is an example so you can understand more dearly the way  heaven moves. Euclid conceives the idea of going by night from Mcgata to Athens in order to heat Socrates, and he takes a lantern. The first faculties he does then is to tract out a general conception of the whole journey. But he does not cake a single step because of this overall plan, unless a particular conception indicating the first step intervenes. So the lantern lights up the first step, the imagination immediately forms a conception of it, desire chooses it, and the feet take the step. Once taken, the lantern lights up the second seep, and Euclid immediately forms a conception of the step, desires it, and performs it. Similarly with the third step and so on. The same process, they think, occurs in the soul of a sphere, when its mind and reason decide in general by way of the heaven's motion to tract our as many figures in heaven and forms in matter as it sees ideas and concepts are fashioned in angel through the power of God Himself This is in order that it may produce, insofar as it can, a work in this world which is in a way compatible to God's producing an angelic work, and thus imitate the first artificer. Yet the soul of a sphere does nor scare to move heaven or to do any faculties, until, like the lantern, its power to move (which is its lowest part) picks our one particular genus of Its seeds from the rest and lights it up so to speak for the eyes. As soon as the force of a particular genus of seeds stands out from the rest of the seeds, the imagination, which is connected to the [soul's) lowest power, forms a conception of the genus, desires it, unfolds it in heaven, forms it in the elements, sows it in heaven, gives birth to it in the elements. The same process rakes place by way of the order of succession in the other seeds. The fatal law consists in this, the order of succession, while desire consists in that, the forming of a conception. Thus "heaven is moved by fare and inborn desires always in the same way as the spirits and humors in us are shaken and formed by vehement chinking and feeling. Nor should you suppose that so many new effects in the world and so many various figures in heaven are unfolded in successive moments, except by way of those [heavenly] souls' new and various affections. For from a cause which is completely stable comes a stable result. We should not suppose that the soul of the heavens is tired by  moving if our soul is not tired. For movers who are not extended along with the object they move do not customarily tire, that is, if they are closest to infinite rest, the end of all motions. Further• more, a sublime [heavenly] body is lS fit for motion as the lowest earthly body is unfit. And if:i light breeze can set the dust in motion, and a wind trapped within the bowels of the earth can shake mountains, will you be surprised if sublime souls at the slightest command revolve bodies of the utmost thinness~ This is especially since they are moving them around a natural axis and in their own circuit, and by natural instinct they incline more to this kind of movement than an earthly body does to descent ( when our soul is leading its body downhill). Heaven's body is as equally and easily adapted to any position  around the center as the matter of the elements is adapted to any form, or rather, much more so. Just as efficacy in moving is appropriate to the soul, so a proclivity for motion is appropriate to the body. For body, since it comes into being from act and is in act and is directed towards act, therefore possesses through its forms the nature always to be in :itt. But since it has both substance and divisible quality, it is compelled to do or be done to whatever it does or is done to in a divisible way, that is, in a moving way. But the motion of heavenly bodies and its variety contributes to generation and to the diversity of faculties to be generated. For the motion embellishes the heavens with various figures; it transmits the heavenly powers to the elements more vehemently; it moves the elements and compels them to be mixed together in many ways; and equally it lights and warms their sphere everywhere in an alternating pattern. Moreover, the matter of the world cannot possess all the figures in heaven at the same time, or all the forms under heaven at the same time, since many of them are contrary to each other. Yet everywhere it desires them all as the perfections of its own nature. Hence it is made capable of sempiternal movement, so that it can attain by succession, in a way at least, what it cannot artain by rest. But why do the spheres chiefly rotate in a circle? Though I have just indicated the answer, let us go into this more deeply. God is one circle, because He is from Himself like a circle and in Himself insofar as He does not have His beginning or ending outside Himself; but beginning in Himself, He ends in Himself. Angel is a double circle, because it returns to the point whence it emanated (when it understands and loves its creator), and because it contemplates itself. Soul is a triple circle, because it gazes back at God, because it contemplates itself, and because it descends from the causes of faculties to their effects, and then ascends from effects to their causes. If these three movers of heaven circle, what is to stop heaven too from being swept up into this circuit? And since heaven imitates the higher causes in its shape and substance, why shouldn't it do so in movement and activity too? Heaven is subject to soul which is mobile, whence it begins to be moved. Once one part of heaven begins to be moved, because of [its) continuity it pulls another part with it and pushes another, and the related parts necessarily turn each other found in a circle. Heaven cannot stand still, since its soul knows no rest; and yet it does not want to relinquish its natural position. Thus it is made to revolve around the same [point] and in the same [place). Heaven is always in motion, since earth which is as fat removed from it as possible is always motionless. What is always in motion necessarily returns to the same point. For there is no straight [motion] of bodies [era• versing) infinite space.s Moreover in The Statesman Plato says: "Rest that is totally with• 0 out change belongs only to the divinest faculties of all. But the world, because it is body, and already falls short of the dignity of faculties divine, cannot be completely without change. Because it is the closest possible to faculties divine, however, it was best for it to be moved in a circular motion, which, since it revolves in the same place, around the same point, according to the same conditions, and continues everlastingly in the same way, it strays as little as it possibly can from resting in a place," Thus Plato.~ We might add that just as among all the species of motion only motion in a place, because it is as it were external, is not compelled to change the substance and natural quality of its subject, so among motions in a place [only] circular motion, because it alone does not change place, can be called it would seem a sort of non-motion. Whoever wants heaven to be at rest should, when it cakes his fancy, attach Saturn’s sphere to the [world's) axis. Then one semi circle of the sphere would be above our head, the other above the head of the Antipodes. Now since all parts of this sphere would be mutually completely alike without any difference of nature, there is no rea• son why the one part would be more here than the other part there. Thus the lower semicircle, because it is equally suited to our region here as to the region of the Antipodes, will strive to be here just as it was there; and the upper semicircle, because of the same suitability for the region of the Antipodes, will strive to be there just as it was here. From this striving one pare will push the other, while each part, because of its equal suitability, will want to be equally everywhere. In actual fact the concave or inner surface of the eighth sphere is the natural location of the sphere of Saturn. The convex surface of Saturn is in contact with the concave sure fact of the eighth sphere. Any particle of Saturn's sphere, because it is equally compatible with any particle of the eighth sphere,  yearns to come into contact with all the unchanging of that sphere. If it remains at rest, individual unchanging will be in contact with individual unchanging, but no one particle with them aII. But by continuing its course it almost attains what it could not attain by remaining at rest, such is the longing of this sphere for the other. Furthermore, the soul of the sphere of Saturn is wholly and simultaneously present at its sphere's every point. This sphere, desirous of enjoying its soul, so proceeds on its course that everywhere through all its parts it enjoys the soul entire. It wings its way with utmost speed so that, insofar as it can become so, it is everywhere wholly and simultaneously wherever the soul is wholly and simultaneously. And because it never finds the soul at rest, it never stops moving itself. Just as the soul revolves continuously around God as its center, so the body which is drawn along by it always revolves around the soul as its center. But heaven remains stationary on the same axis, because [its) soul, in that it participates in mind, also participates in a degree of rest. All rational souls do this in their bodies. All bodies do this for [their) souls, whether we are speaking about the souls of the spheres and constellations or chose of demons and men. But if such is less apparent in this gross body of ours, it happens nonetheless in the soul's aethereal envelope, which we will discuss elsewhere, and which Zoroaster held to be revolving within us toncinually. Finally, Iet us conclude this discussion of the movement of u heaven with this thought: Neither heavens mobile body nor the mover which is moving in order to produce the heaven's motion is the principal leader and end of this motion, lest in such motion fa. ciguc and deviation may occur. For the motion is always around a fixed point and directed towards what is at rest. 