(which is what we want). But if we grant the third option, namely that they could be partly alike, partly unlike in nature, then, since they could not both agree and differ on account of the same prin• ciple, they would possess a common nature through which they agree, and two peculiar natures, moreover, in the two of them, over and beyond the common nature, through which they dis• agree. Therefore neither A nor B would be simple, but each would be compounded from the common nature and the peculiar prop• crcy. Neither would be first, because they would depend on that which has united their mutually different pares into one. Neither would be self-sufficient, since the whole needs its parts, and one part needs the other. Neither would be all-powerful, because nei• cher is completely united. 
That common nature, which A and B each possess in like mea-2 sure and by virtue of which both of them equally arc principles, will be che principle rather chan the two of them. Or rather, what gives the common nature co these mutually different principles will be the principle. For this one nature, which lies at ease in some and is cramped within the bounds ofochers, flows from that unity which depends upon itself and is confined by no limit. That one common nature, therefore, comes to both A and B from else­where and comes from a higher principle. 
Nay, even those two peculiar natures, through which A and B 3 differ, come co them from outside. For except for these two pecu• liar natures nothing is left in A and B but the one common nature, from which, if they arc born perfect, the peculiar natures which are added to A and B will no longer be different, as the metaphysi­cians suppose. 2 Rather, they will be one and the same property in both A and B, the same vein gushing forth. For the same property will gush out and Aow back in accordance with the perfect manner of [its] pure nature. Thus if two perfect properties are present in A and B, they necessarily come from outside. \Vherefore each ac­cepts its essence's property from elsewhere, and because each is al­lotted its own nature from elsewhere, neither exists chrough itself bur is made by a higher principle. 
In any natural genus what is che highest of that genus is solely 4 one. If two highest lights exist, each, in that it is che highest light, unites [with the other) and one thing results. Bur if two things still exist, chey differ by way ofanocher nacure rather chan by way of the light. Therefore another nature is also present which is different from the light and by whose contagion the light becomes murky and is not the highest. So roo the highest heat is that which is not mixed with cold or anything else. For were ic mixed, ic would be prevenced [from being the highest hear]. It would have che capacity to become more and more fierce only if it were purged. 11mefore the highest in any genus is one alone and of char genus' one nacure alone. Take the highest light: ic is one light, not two, and it is only light, not lighc together with something else. Now God is the highest of all things. Therefore God is one and simple: indeed, God is the one highest unity, the one highest truth and goodness, one God. 
For the Placonists, God is one for three reasons. Firstly because 5 He is highest unity. For if whatever is highest is one of its kind, what could be more one of its kind than highest unity? Each par­ticular plurality of innumerable objects is brought back co ics own unity: the plurality of human beings to a single human species, that of horses to the one equine species, and so on. Take all these particular unities, which arc bound by a certain number, char is, rake the species of things, and collect chem into one common unity, namely God, rhe lord of species, in order that, just as infinite pluralities of individual entities may be brought back to the finite unities of their species, so the finite unities of the species may be brought back to the unique unity above species. It is ap• propriare char, jusc as each particular order of things is led back to its own one principle, so the universal order of things may be led back co che one universal principle. And just as individual materi­als arc led back to one matter-all the world's members to one body-so all the world's natures should be led back to one nature, all the world's lives co one life, all (its} movements to one move• ment, all (its] movers to one mover. 
Next, when several things that naturally differ from each other 6 unite in one common order, necessarily such an order must exist among them on account of chc order they possess with respect co one single thing. For instance, the order chat exists between the pares of an army is the result of the order of the whole army in re• lacion co the one leader. For the fact chat things which differ one from another arc able co be united in mutual communion does not arise from their own peculiar natures; for in these they differ, be­ing disunited rather because of them. Nor docs it arise from hav­ing various different agents impose order on chem; for agents who differ in their natures, to the extent chat they differ, do not incline cowards one order. And so the order shared by many things either arises by chance, or it is imposed by one primary agent who di­rects everything cowards a single end. Now all the pares of the world, however much they differ, arc brought together in mutual order, because chey make up one body and they borrow natures and arc borrowed in rum. Lower bodies arc moved by higher bod­ies, higher bodies by incorporeal nature. Nor docs this order come about by chance, because it is always the same and alike, reweaving the like fabric in a like manner. God then is chc single agent who gives order to the single universe. God is one, by the Pl:uoniscs' first argument, because He is unity. 
God is one, by the Placoniscs' second argument, because He is 7 truth. The highest truth is one. For were there two highest truths, then either one of them has what the other has, or it does not. If the first, one truth exists, not two; if the second, neither truth is the highest. For one truth lacks the portion of truth in the ocher, and the other the portion of truth in the one. 
God is one, by the Platonists' third argument, because He is 8 the highest goodness. 111c highest goodness certainly embraces whatever good can be found anywhere. Were you to assume two highest goodnesses, whatever good is in the one would also be in the other (otherwise neither of chem would be the highest), so chat in terms of the nature of rhe good they would be one, not two. But nothing else bur the nature of the good is mingled with chem, or they would nor be the highest goodnesses but rather im• pure goodnesses. So they arc completely one. 
Lascly, if two gods exist, and each of them is equally capable of 9 bringing chis whole universe into being, then neither of chem will make the world ( in which case the power to generate in both of chem will be to no purpose, and the world will nowhere exist); or one of chem will create the world {in which case the other's power to generate will be wasted); or both of them will create a whole world (in which case there will be two worlds utterly and mutually alike, only one of which would suffice, the ocher being super• Auous). But if one of them is capable of making the whole world, and the ocher only part of it, then the one incapable of making the whole world is nor God, and he will generate to no purpose the part of the world which the other god made at the same time he made the whole world. Ifeach, however, has the power to create half of the world, neither of chem is the universal principle. And since the parts in the one whole join together for one end in na• ture's harmony, the paired gods will have to be referred to one god who is higher, so that the morion produced by the two gods from their harmony-a harmony derived from some one higher god­may be reduced to one motion. 
If you maintain that twin gods create two completely distinct 10 and different worlds, you muse accept chat the two gods and the two worlds never accord in any way. How then docs each of these gods exist and how is it one god -is alive, inrclligenc, and active-and how is each of these worlds one world, and a corporeal work? Therefore the twin worlds will be in mutual accord. Bue the one nature which harmonizes them is derived in the end from one principle, not from two. Again, if both gods were always to desire the same end, either one would come from the other or both would come from a higher one, or, at the least, share one sub­stance. For if they did not have that much in common, they would not work for the same end. Either way, there is only one god. But if one god wants this same creation but the other docs not, then chis creation will both come into being and nor come into being, exist and not exist, if the one god's yea is equally as strong as the other god's nay. For the god whose will always prevailed would be God alone. Bue if they were sometimes to agree with each other, and sometimes to disagree, and sometimes one were to have the upper hand, sometimes the other, then both of them would be subject to change. Nor should we agree with the Manichacan and Gnostic philosophers when they declare there arc two gods, one the author ofall good things, the other the author ofall evils.3 For just as God, who is the author of good things, is the highest good and totally without evil, so His opposite is the highest evil, de­prived of all good. He will not be capable, therefore, of action or knowledge; will not be alive; will be entirely without existence. For existence, life, and understanding arc all good and arc covered as goods. 
: III : 
No plurality ofgods exists one above the other without end. 
Gr1nced, you may say, that there is a god above angel and chat he 1 is one, and thus that many equal gods cannot exist. Yee one god could still exist above another without end. Although I believe chis posmon has been refuted by earlier arguments, additional proofs will disprove this more clearly. 

Were there innumerable gods, the causes of things would be 2 infinite, each more powerful than chc other in numberless succes• sion, since indeed these gods arc the causes of things and are set one above rhc ocher in numberless succession. Were chat so, there would also be an infinite number of effects in the world. For every cause produces its particular effect in the order of things; and as the causes differ in their power, so too do the effects. Thus infinite effects would descend, each one weaker than rhe one preceding it, in numberless succession, if the causes were infinite, each one ex­celling rhc other in numberless succession. Since a higher cause al­ways projects its power co produce effects further rhan a lower cause, the projection of such effects would proceed to infinity if the ascent of causes were infinite. 
Surely anyone can see this is absurd. To begin with, if there 3 were no first thing in the world, there would be no consequents. For everything is derived from the first, and were chis not to exist anywhere, the source of the issuing forth of things, Rowing as they do one from another, would never get started. Secondly, we sec in the world that some things arc more perfect than ochers, and that the power of perfection increases as we ascend and diminishes as we descend. Hence the narural strength of things gradually weak­ens as we descend. Inevitably then, at some point in chis gradual diminution, it disappears altogether. So it is not possible to have one thing below another in an infinite series. So there will not be endless effects. So there will not be endless causes, since, inas• much as perfection increases as we ascend, it is clear chat at some point perfection will attain its goal. Why do we consider soul better than body unless it is because it is closer to the highest goodness? If there were no highest goodness anywhere but an infinite ascent from good to good, then body would be an infinite dist:mcc from highest goodness, and soul would be similarly. One infinite distance is neither greater nor smaller than another. And there would be no rational principle or ideal measure by which some things could be preferred co ochers. Soul then would be no closer to and have no more in common with goodness than body would; it would be no better than body, therefore, and angel would be no better than soul. 
Whatever flows from something else is by nature in Rux, for it 4 does not exist on its own but comes into existence by way ofa cer­tain Rux. If there were no first something in the world, everything would Row from something else, and so all would be in flux. Unity would nowhere exist, nor equality, similarity, stability, order or restoration. But since these do exist in things, the Rux of things Rowing out one from another must be led and kept in check through the stability of some axis which docs not Row out from another. In the same way the interminable Rux of liquid bodies must be terminated, not by another liquid body likewise Rowing away, but by a solid body. Finally, any higher level docs something to the lower, and in turn receives something from the level above it. If there were no first level in things and no last level, every in• termediate level would depend on an infinite number of higher levels and in return produce an infinite number of lower. It would therefore receive an infinite number ofperfections from the higher, since it receives from any of its causes something good; and it would bestow an infinite number of gifts on those below, for it would distribute something to each of them. So it would be full of measureless power and limitless perfections. Thus all things would be equally infinite. No one thing would be more outstanding than another, no cause would be better than its effect. Or perhaps anything would be infinitely finite, because it would be exceeded endlessly by its antecedents; or yet again, anything would be in• finite, because it would rule over endless consequents. No true knowledge would exist anywhere, because one cannot understand infinite causes of things. Nothing would exist in the universe to excite or check the appetite, if there were no first principle and ul­timate end, for every appetite is excited and fortified by its power. 


Lee us accept then char one universal principle exists. Let us call 5 it unity, for in the perfection ofits simplicity it towers over all. Let us call it truth, for in producing it gives existence to all. Lee us call it goodness, for in recalling all things, having once created them, back to itself, it endows them with well-being. St. John was the most divine of all theologians ( the Platonist Amclius gladly em­braced him),~ and his theology reaches us to call unity rhe princi­ple, truth the reason of the principle, and goodness the love of the rational principle. And let chis substance -unity chat is true and good, truth chat is one and good, goodness chat is one and true-be the one, the good, rhc true God. Because He is unity, He is truth; because He is true unity, He is goodness. He enfolds all in unity, He unfolds all in truth, He pours forth all in goodness. Af­ter all things have issued from Him, they flow back again through goodness, arc reformed through truth, are restored co oneness through unity. 
: IV : 
God's power is unlimited. 
Just as extreme dispersion leads to infinite weakness, so in the J highest unity dwells infinite power. Act by its very nature contains no limit, for to be subject to a limit is passion, which is the oppo­site of act. Therefore ace is only subject co a limit co the extent that it depends on a substrate which possesses a degree of passive potentiality. The divine ace, however, subsists in itself. The active power, insofar as it is power, is not itself confined to a fixed num­ber of levels. For what prevents the power as power from being 

• BOOK II • CHAPTER IV · 
thought about or from existing on one level as on another:' There­fore it accepts no limit as to its levels except from the passive po­tentiality into which it is mixed, or from a limiting cause. Bue the divine power is unmixed and is the highest power. 
Being itself, considered absolutely, is unmeasurable, because it 2 can be communicated co an infinite number of things and be thought about in innumerable ways. So if the being of anything is finite, it muse either be limited by its cause or by its substrate. Neither of these conditions applies co God. In infinite being is infinite power just as in finite being is finite powcr.5 In pure noth­ingness there is no habit (or condition] of being of any sort, true or imaginary. For who can define nothingness by reason of being:' Ir follows that in pure being there is no privation of being, no potentiality for nor-being, whether truly or in rhe imagination. Therefore what pertains co His eternity cannot be compelled or thought nor to be; nor can any degree of power which the mind can conceive be wanting to it. Otherwise mind, which is rhe effect of [i.e., is caused by] God, would be able co extend itself beyond God, the mind which can always think of a further degree in a finite scale of degrees. Or rather, the mind would be disposed in vain for infinite progression unless it found some infinite limit. Given char truth and goodness lack no pare of rhc true and the good, all chose degrees, however many, arc present co chem, de­grees chat can be understood as true or desired as good. Such de­grees are numberless. 
The further a passive potentiality is from act, the stronger every 3 agent who brings it into acc. For instance, one needs a greater power ro hear water than to heat air. Bue what is totally non-exis­tent is infinitely distant from act and has no potentiality for receiv­ing the act of existence. We shall discuss chis lacer in more derail. Whether God created something our of nothing a little while ago, therefore, or whether He continuously produces the prime matter of bodies and the essence of minds and souls using no pre-existent substrate, and keeps them in existence ever dependent on the prime act, that is, His act divine, He undoubtedly possesses :1.n unlimited power of acrion.6 

In short, the movement :1.nd the order of this vase complex ma• 4 chine, so regul:!.r over so m:1.ny centuries, demonstrate that the power of its governor is inexhaustible :1.nd therefore infinite. For finite power over the course of infinite time, or even over a long period of finite time, becomes tired and halting. It is from God's infinite power that all intellects therefore receive the ability to un­dersr:1.nd always :1.nd with certainty; that souls receive the ability to think discursively without end; that matter has ics unlimited po• tenriality for receiving; that movement :1.nd rime c:1.n Aow on with­out limit; char even the generation of things c:1.n continue in its endless alternating succession, as the natural philosophers sup­pose. For they think that action and infinite morion derive from infinite power, and that anything said to be infinite, whether po• tentially or in any other way, is so, and is adjudged so, because of that highest infinity which exists in act. Hence the divine nature is called by Orpheus "the infinite end."7 
: V : 
God is everlasting. 
The stronger the power by which anyrhing endures and is pre• 1 served, the longer char thing l:1.Scs. If chis is so, then God by His infinite power endures Himself and preserves all other things to infinity. Divine truth precedes every beginning of things and suc­ceeds their every end. For it W3S true before each's beginning that there would be a beginning; and ir will be true after each's ending char there was an ending. Bue whatever is true at any rime is true because ofrrurh. Bur if rhe rrurh is said ro have begun ar a certain time, rhen long before, because of the same trurh, it was true rhar that truth would begin at a certain rime. And if we suppose it comes to an end, even after that, because ofrhe same rrurh, it will be true that rhar truth has come to an end. For one cannot think of truth as ever beginning or ending. Again, if God exists totally beyond movement and time, then He does not sustain change within time and mutate with regard to being and nor-being from an earlier ro a later state. IfGod is absolutely necessary being, as I shall demonstrate below, He could never have nor been and He could never nor be. Finally, if something is born at some rime, it comes from something prior; and whatever dissolves, dissolves into something older. \1/hat is first cannot have begun and cannot end. 

We often mentally conceive ofa simple duration without begin-2 ning or end, and we call ir, as it were, sempirerniry. This is God Himself even if we do nor realize it. For every simple infinity is God Himself. Bur the phantasy prevents us from perceiving chis, for it straightway rakes this simple unchanging sempiternity and endows and confounds it with flux and plurality. And so it com­pletely deceives us when it drags what is che substantial stability of eternity down into rhe accidental Aux of rime, and thus forces us to rhink rhar what God is is rime. So eternal God reveals Himself to us then but only wrapped up in time. 
No one should doubt char God always is when God is "always 3 Himself"; or rather, when sempiternity itself is God Himself. The things which are called sempiternal are properly those which God has propagated through Himself and in Himself. 
VI 

God is omnipresent. 
We can prove from what has been said already that God is omni-1 present. Just as a body has an impact on its context because of its quantitative dimensions, so an incorporeal substance has an im­pact because of its power. Wherefore, just as some infinite di­mension of body ifit existed in nature would be everywhere, so a measureless power of incorporeal substance, since it docs exist, necessarily exists everywhere. And just as a particular cause is present in a particular effect, fire for instance in an ignited log, so a universal cause is present in a universal effect. So wherever one discovers or conceives of what is a universal effect, there God is present who is the universal cause. And wherever there is a prod­uct which necessarily comes into being through one specific cause and without an intermediary, there God must be the cause of it. But something is everywhere which through God alone can subsist by way of creation of sorts. That something is prime matter in bodies and essence in spirits. 
To be everywhere present at the same time is desirable as a 1 good, no less good, almost, than being always. But the prime good lacks nothing good. Nothing prevents God from penetrating ev­erything; for nothing resists infinite purity and power. God's na­ture sustains with regard to itself no limit of place, just as it sus­tains in itself no limit of rank. For if the highest infinity sustains nothing finite, then God has no finite spatial presence, just as He has no finite power, action or duration. One cannot imagine that the good is less present to all the world than soul to all the body. The world is smaller in proportion to God than body to soul; and the world needs God more than the body needs soul. For the good is more diffused than life because it accords with more things; it is also more necessary to the world than life. Without life, the world would cease to be moved; without the good it would cease co exist. If a single life is omnipresent, therefore, in the one living body of the world (as I shall demonstrate elsewhere), 11 fortiori the one good is everywhere, even outside the world. 


Ifmatter, the prime patient, and essence are extended through 3 all, then to a much greater degree does God, the prime agent, ex• tend Himself through all and beyond all. It does not behoove the mind with all its scheming to advance further than the good's presence; but the mind docs proceed through the measureless. What is appropriate, say the Platonists, is chat the infinite good, brimming over with abundance, should pour itself whole through infinity, so that it leaves no single particle of infinity deprived ofits presence, whether it be real or imaginary, whether it is in the world or imagined outside the world. Ifin face the nature of the good is to multiply itself, infinite good will multiply itself in­finitely. 
It is difficult to find where God is. For what is confined by the 4 limit of no substrate or location is nowhere. It is even more diffi­cult to find where God is not. For present in all things is that in which things everywhere exist, by which they arc made, through which they are preserved. God is in all things, therefore, because all things arc in Him. If they were not in Him, they would be no• where and completely non-existent. Through God "where" itself exists and is said to be "everywhere." Through God as the lord and the light, whatever acts, aces and seeks; and each seeks "some• where." Nothing is ever sought for but che good, nothing ever found buc the true. God is every good, God is every truth. God is fullness and plenitude itself. I do not see, therefore, why He can­not multiply Himself through all things and fill each individual. If visible light, which is of something and in something and finite, can expand itself through the whole world, then the light invisible, which is infinite of itself and in itself, certainly multiplies itself 
.......,.--..--:a______-'iiiill-----=, 
throughout the world and beyond. For finite light, just as it ob­tains from infinite light the power to light and to light intensely, so it obtains the power to light as far as possible. If it fares ill for things when the sun's light is absent for the shortest time, because ofan eclipse or night, how much worse do we suppose it would be if God were always absent from them~ Why wouldn't things rush headlong rather into non-existence, if that which is being itself were absent for a moment? Orpheus declares with wisdom in his Hym11 to Saturn, "You who dwell in every part of the world, prince of generarion.''8 
I 
We often think of a capacity which is utterly pure, which no s limits can ever contain but which itself can contain everything that is able to exist or be imagined. Since pure infinity is nothing other than God, when we think about char infinite capacity, it is God Himself we are thinking of, though we are not aware of it. Quickly our phanrasy misleads us with its tricks, replacing the di­vine rays all of a sudden with a figure made up of lines of length, breadth and depth, and thus forcing what is the divine light co seem to us some sort of dimension or empty space. When we think that God completely fills all things, the phancasy deceives us again; for then it persuades us that in some sense He is located in 
things. Bue He truly is everywhere such that in Him exists what is called "everywhere"; or rather, such char He Himself is "the ev• 
erywhere" which contains itself and everything else. And all those things, except for His everywhere, which are said co exist ev­erywhere are properly those things which His everywhere multi­plies in Himself through Himself. Reason dictates that what is called "everywhere" is nothing other than the universal nature of things, and that nature is God. So when we say that God is cv• erywhere, it should be understood to mean that God is in Him• self; and that nowhere, conversely, is God moreover absent, if what is called "everywhere" is nowhere absent. 
Our phantasy, in supposing that the nature of things is chis cor-6 porcal machine alone, exclaims chat what is called "everywhere" is nothing other than the total extension of corporeal objects; and since it supposes this to be superlatively large, it doubts chat God can fill it all. Reason retorts chat the corporeal machine is a frail and insubstantial shadow which can be divided countless times into tiny parts and particles of parrs and can possess indetermin• able smallness but determined bigness. It asserts, however, that the truly big is that in which nothing is small and in which whatever there exists is equally whole and big. And just as the whole is un• folded through all that is within, so the whole is unfolded or ex­tended through all that is without. Thus God, subsisting in Him­self, exists everywhere. God is not extended through the world, but the world, insofar as it is able, is extended through God. Just as the world acquires the divine power, which is infinite, in a finite manner, so it comes into God's presence, which shines through all infinity, in a finite location. The world does not proceed in a straight line in order to reach God, who is nowhere absent, but re• valves around Him as best it may; or rather, it revolves in Him, only, however, where the position and the movement is prescribed by divine law. 
The Egyptian priests, Anebon and Abamon,9 together with the 7 Platonists Plotinus, Iamblichus andJulian,10 claimed chat not only God, but all mind as well, whether angelic or animal, extends it• self whole through infinity. Consequently, such [rational] spirits arc mutually present to themselves everywhere without mutual confusion, just as the different habits of virtues are in the soul and the different images of colors in the air. The Pbtonists' view rests on the following foundations. Forms inferior to rational spirit, be­cause they arise from particular and determined portions of mat• ter arc necessarily confined to chem. Rational spirits, because in no way do they seem from matter, possess no fixed dimension in themselves and arc not bound co any dimension at all. Wherefore, since they can look to any part of any space equally, they are either nowhere or they arc universally everywhere. We cannot say chat whatever truly exists is present nowhere. So chcy arc absent no• where. 
All mind is in some sense eternal. What is eternal, though indi-8 visible in terms of rime, extends itself across the whole course of rime. So coo, though it is indivisible in terms of space, yet ir is spread ouc over chc whole of space. And as rime relates ro eternity, so docs che temporal relate co the eternal. But the moments of rime always meet with chc moment of eternity. So the points of a temporal body everywhere meet with the point of eternal spirit. The eternal, just as it is always outside rime, so it seems co be ev­erywhere outside place. Wherever the moments of time flow, they flow up against the point of eternity. In whatever direction a line is drawn, ir meets the point. Wherever space extends, it encounters the eternal. 
What is ir char can be everywhere most~ Certainly it must be 9 what the dimension of quantity docs not oppose. Again, what can be always~ Ir is preeminently what the action of quality docs not overcome. But since quality is much more efficacious than quan· city, whatever can be always unhindered by quality, afortiori can be everywhere unhindered by dimension. Motion in place, chat is, ex• cernal motion, appears the more perfect in something the more efficacious its inner nature. So in order ro extend itself through cv• crything-which imitates morion in place -a thing must first have rhc power to preserve itself indefinitely, which we call its in• ner perfection. Anything to which chis inner perfection belongs is consequently capable of external expansion through universal space. To be always, which is like an internal condition, is more outstanding than to be everywhere, which is like an external one. Therefore what can always be, afortiori can be everywhere. For it is easier ro exceed the sluggish dimensions [of space) than the efficacious movement ofquality and time. 
Mind more than anything else signifies both to itself and co 10 others the nature, the wisdom, and the will of God. So it is­sues from God like a word, or rather, like rhc meaning of a word char God speaks. Since wherever the speaker is, there is the word, it follows that mind is everywhere, just as God is everywhere. Mind in its chinking and willing is without limit, according as it thinks and wills things without limit, and in its activity discourses through the limitless. Bue it cannot shine forth or do its work where it docs not exist, nor can its sphere ofactivity be more ex• tensive than its existence. So it exists in the limitless. 

The goal of fire is the vault of highest heaven. So each lirtle 11 flame, if nothing stopped it, would fly up there, and when it reached the vaulc, if it had dimension enough. it would fan out through the whole and thus enjoy all char is its by nature. If it were indivisible, it would try to be present wholly at the vault's ev­ery point so chat everywhere it might enjoy the whole. The target and goal ofmind is the true and che good, chat is, God. Thither it hastens like fire, driven [first] by its essential instinct prior to its vital one, and by its viral instinct prior to its intellectual one. Bur nothing can stop the mind's essence from penetrating as far as God; for body docs not resist spirit, much less does spirit resist spirit. And God penetrates all. Thus the mind through its essen· rial instinct reaches God always; and, we should add, reaches Him everywhere. For it strives cowards chis; and it has no dimension assigned co it, no natural need ofsome location, which mighc pre• vent it from being everywhere. And because, wherever it is, it does something, it follows that it lives and understands everywhere and always in God. Now, although all minds exist in the limitless, yec different minds seem manifestly to direct their actions to different regions of the limitless-angelic minds to governing, ensouled minds to giving life. It is as though many candles were burning in a single hall: their individual lights fill the whole hall, and though they are joined, they arc not confused together; for you can still cell one from another. Though the lights extend the length of the 
hall. yet individual lights are assigned to particular candles. It is possible that some mind may think it exists only in the body chat it controls, whereas it exists outside the body everywhere, just as our own mind, though ic is in the whole body, yet, in the view of many philosophers, supposes itself to exist only in the heart. This is what they say concerning mind. Let us return to God. 
: VII : 
God moves and preserves everything and does all things in all. 
So far we have shown that God exists, that He is one, first, and 1 infinite in power, duration, and extent. This confirms what Par­menides che Pythagorean said about God in his book On Trntl, aml Opinion. God he said is "being, one, motionless, and infinire."11 Now I shall proceed to prove chat chis God moves and preserves everything and docs all things in all. 
If God is absolutely simple unity, and if this unity being the 2 highest is one and alone in nature, then whatever is ocher than God is mulriple and composite. Bue all multiplicity derives from unity and all composition from the purity ofsimple things. If God is the highest truth, and nothing can exist without truth -for how will anything be unless it truly is what it is said to be and it is true it is itself~ -then all things come from God. IfGod is the highest goodness and goodness by its very nature wholly communicates it• self, then God imparts Himself to all things. Hence a.II seek the good, because, since they were born from rhe good, they seek out their origin, in order to be perfected there whence chey arose. All things always do something. They do more at char rime when they are the more excellent in their species; they do most when they are in a more excellent species. All things to the best of their ability do things like themselves, also if they can like things in their species; and they do them for the sake of the good. So all action in all things whatsoever comes from the good, through the good, and for the good. The highest goodness, therefore, because ic is good­ness, aces. Because ic is the highest, ic aces always. And because it is not limited to a particular species but is common equally to all species, it acts on chem all. 
Furthermore, since God is not mixed with anything, He is the particular leader of no one thing but the common leader of all. If He is common, then the gift [He gives] in common belongs co Him. Being is common to all things. Being, therefore, wherever it may be, depends on God.ti Zoroaster touched on chis mystically: "Everything is born from a single fire."13 The lower bodies of the world make the passage from not-being into being and cross over from being into not-being. Higher bodies change from one being into another, or from one mode of being into another. So all these bodies are by nature equally inclined to being and co not-being. If nothing else existed above such higher bodies, they would either have never accepted being, or, had they accepted it, they would have ceased to be long ago. They would not have accepted being, because if they arc equally and naturally inclined co being and to not-being, they do not determine whether co exist ac all. Long ago they would have ceased to be, because, since their nature is fluid, they would long ago have ebbed away into nothingness, had chey not been shored up by something else more stable. An incorporeal and stable substance therefore governs the changeable bodies of the world. If this, like bodies, is equally inclined to being and co not-being, then chis in rum requires something else to keep it in place. Eventually, there must be a single substance which necessar­ily exists ofitself. Such a substance will be entirely simple. Were ic made up of parts, it would certainly not exist through itself, but through the harmony of the pares, and through Him who had harmonized the diverse parts. Or rather, che substance would be as subject ro the dissolution of its parts as it would have been to their connection. Thus it would not exist from necessity, since through dissolution it could also not exist at some time or other. At any rare, God is chis simple substance, necessarily subsisting through Himself.14 That is why Orpheus called God "necessity'': "Strong necessity rules over all."15 
IfGod is rhc highest necessity of being and only one thing is 4 highest in any genus, no other thing except God will be this high­est necessity of being. If, for instance, you were co claim char angel were also such, so char two highest necessities existed, God and angel, you would have to show how angel differs from God. It can· not be in the necessity itself of being, for in chis regard you are supposing they arc one. So there will be something in angel apart from the necessity through which it is able to differ from God. Hence angel will not be the highest necessity, since it will nor be the pure and simple, but a mixed necessity. The highest in any gc· nus must possess the nature of that genus in a pure form unmixed with other things, for any mixrure would diminish it. You would also have to answer the question: Whence docs angel receive the property added to rhe necessity~ Docs it come from its own neces­sity, or from elsewherd Ifwe suppose the first, God will possess the same property, issuing from a like necessity of His own. Hence angel is not distinguished from God through that property. Ifwe concede the second alrernative, it follows that the particular nature of angel originates not from angel but from somewhere else, since it is acquiring its distinguishing property from outside itself. What depends on something outside itself necessarily does nor ex­ist through itself. The necessity of being, therefore, is not angel or anything else but God alone. Now if nothing other than God nec­essarily exists through itself, everything takes its being from God. 
Thar puts paid to the impious opinion of certain natural phi-s losophers who argue that matter, rhe world and the mind nor only have always existed, but in no way depend in essence on God, though they depend on Him for their actualicy. For they admit chat all arc moved and ace for che sake of the good as their end. They should have taken into account chat whatever cannot be self­sufficient in its acrivicy but demands sufficiency from some cxtcr• nal end, is even less able co be self-sufficient in its essence, seeing chat it receives its essence from a principle outside itself. For if the same thing is responsible for perfecting as for creating, and vice versa, then just as all things arc perfected by the good as che end, so all arc created by the good as the principle. Since essence is en• tircly perfect at its fountain of origin, if any of these three, [ mat• ccr, the world and mind,] were the fount of its essence, the sub­stance of any one of them would be equally perfect both with respect to each ocher and with respect to God: and they would be turned back, not co God, but co themselves for their end and their perfection. 
The relationship of arr co nature is the same as chat of nature 6 to God. Works ofarr remain uncorrupted as long as they arc pre• served by chc power of nature: for instance, how long a statue lases depends on the natural solidity of the stone or bronze. In the same way, natural objects last as long as they arc preserved by God's divine influence. And just as nature gives movement to its works, so God gives nature being. The works of nature arc moved as long as nature moves chem. Nature exists as long as God keeps it in cxistence.16 Further, chis universal work ofGod has either al­ways existed, or it came into existence at some point. If it always existed, it is impossible to specify a first moment at which, com• pared to ocher moments, it received existence from God. Eicher it received it at no one momenc-buc that is wrong-or it is rcceiv• ing it from Him at every moment. Bue chis is nothing ocher than co be preserved by Him continually. If, on the other hand, it re• ccived being at a particular moment, then all the more docs it need God as its preserver, since it would need Him even if it were pos• iced as eternal. Certainly, what belongs co something by its vecy 
nature belongs co it before what comes to it externally. Non-being belongs intrinsically to something made, since it would not have existed without an external cause. It has being because of the cause. Therefore non-being belongs to it prior to being. So being preserved by a cause belongs to it prior to being preserved by it• self. And because what is natural is never lost, it is always such that, were the power of its cause withdrawn, it would not persist in being, since from the beginning it was naturally such that it could not issue into being apart from the action of its cause. Properly, we call that cause God: He alone makes any one thing whole. He is nor compelled: He needs no help from another or to borrow material from elsewhere. But everything is compelled to• rally to depend on Him, as a shadow depends on a body. Since a cause causes its whole effect, and since the effect, if we compare it to the substance of the cause, is something illusory and empty rather than substantial, so the effect, being empty, needs concinu• ously che assistance of the cause, and the cause, which effects chc whole, preserves the whole. Ifwe compare the world to God, the finite to the infinite, it is more empty and shadowy than the finite 
body's finite shadow when compared to the body. 
Finally, compare the way the highest universal cause entirely dominates things-if they continually depend upon it and have nor issued from it just once-co the way reAections arc made by bodies bur arc preserved in a rnirror. 17 Since God moves and pre· serves all. He operates in all; char is, the causes subordinate to God do nothing without the power and activity of God. If God bestows being and act on angel and preserves being and ace, He also bestows chc power of acting, and bestows and preserves the action. So whatever angel docs naturally it docs through rhe power of God: like a tool it responds to rhe craftsman's dexterity, God therefore nor only moves angel but what angel produces; and much more indeed than angel He produces what angel produces, since He is the first source of action. If this work produced by an• gel moves something, it docs so through the power of God, through chat self-same power by which it was made by angel. So everywhere whatever comes into being, and by whatsoever ic is made, docs so because of God's power; and this is especially so since all which do something in a manner bestow being on their work-I mean chis or that being, a particular being. Thus all which arc agents under God arc united in producing one common effect, that of being. Bue such a large number of different agents cannot collaborate in producing one produce, chat is, being, unless it is because they themselves arc one. They arc not one unless it is because they arc under one ruler and have one goal. So all the sub­sequent agents produce because of chc power of the first agent, the one God.18 
Shouldn't we establish the order of causes according co the 8 order of effects? Being is the first of all effects, for the rest arc nothing ocher than particular determinations and properties of being. Every single thing in nature first exists; then it exists as chis or that, as a p:micular thing. Moreover, existence is the last thing lost. For being particularly is lost before being absolutely. 19 Wherefore being itself is properly the effect of chat agent which is the principle and end of all. If the subsequent agents contribute anything to being, they do it through the power of the first agent. They themselves, being inferior and of more limited authority, do nothing else save only chat, with God's aid, they cake that univer• sal power and action of God, which is directed everywhere to• wards universal being, and establish distinctions here and there, introducing certain states of being rather than the nature itself of being.20 Or rather, by means of various intermediaries the divine power divides itself into different effects, just as the light of the Sun, which in itself is indifferent co any given color, if it shines through two stained glass windows, one of which is red, the other green, will produce two patches of lights on chc floor, one red, one green. That each is bright derives absolutely from the light. That one is red, the other green also derives from the light, bur the light rakes different forms depending on which window it is shining through. 
We can conclude the following. First, the prime cause acts more 9 powerfully in any effect than the subsequent causes, because the footprint printed by ir, namely being, is printed earlier and effaced lacer than the footprints of rhc other causes; it is, so to speak, printed more deeply. Next, the subsequent causes make their foot• prints on top of the footprint of the first cause; and jusr as :ill their works arc necessarily based on the work of the first cause, so they establish their powers and actions in the power and action of rhe first cause. 
: VIII : Whatever God does He does through His own being. 
Lest any Epicurean declare char God, if He did so much, would 1 be troubled by deliberation and burdened by the labor, we should remember char God, because He can do His work through His being alone, docs not need deliberation or choice. For if the divine being itself were ofinsufficient strength to work through itself, but needed some deliberation that differed from its being, certainly the being of no other thing would do anything through itself. In fact, however, the qualities of bodies act on each ocher without any deliberation. Is it through choice rather than through being char the Sun gives light ro rhe world, char fire hears, char rhe soul nourishes the body? Even things that act by choice do something too through their natural being, that is, through the power natu• rally innate in rh:ir being. A man's soul, though it does many things by choice, yet without choice and by [its] being gives life to the body. Isn't choice itself in a sense a product of the thinking soul?21 Such a product must come direccly from the soul's being without any prior choice, lest that prior choice likewise require an­other prior choice, and so on. Thus any product of the thinking soul would require innumerable choices preceding it before ir could begin to come into being. Never would it come into being, as it is impossible to traverse infiniry. We may conclude as follows. If action which is brought about by natural being is present in all things, bur not the action brought about by choosing (because bodies choose nothing), and if too the action brought about by be­ing itself and nature always precedes the action brought about by choice and deliberation, then it is obvious that the action brought about by being is proper ro che first and universal cause, which is God, in order that the prime universal action might be that of the prime universal agent. 
Action char comes from being does not involve toil or labor. Thus the Sun with utmost case lights up an infinite number of things in a way in a single act, and in illuminating generates chem. Fire with utmost case heats a host of things. l11e soul nourishes the body and digests many things in it without any worry or labor. Thus God through His being, which is an utterly simple univer­sal center whence everything else is spun our like lines, with the utmost case and command makes whatever depends on Him tremble. There is this difference between the prime agent and rhe subsequent agents. When we say the prime agent acts through be­ing, we mean it aces through pure being, whereas the ochers ace through the being that is a natural or so to speak essential power. Therefore what precedes the activiry that stems from deliberation is the acriviry which is enacted by rhc essential power, and this in turn is preceded by the acriviry which is the result of pure being. l11e activiry brought about by the (essential] power is achieved with greater case than that brought about by deliberation. By the 
same measure, the activity executed by pure being is achieved with greater ease than that executed by the power. 
: IX : God understands Himselffirst and every individual thing too. 
Intellect would never be capable of understanding an object if it 1 did not have something in common with it. Given this affinity be­tween intellect and rhe object to be understood, the way some• thing reaches the point of being intelligible is the same way it reaches the point of being intellect. Bur departure from matter is the one way for each entity to attain that goal of being under• standing and intelligible, of being such in other words that it can be properly understood. For things arc properly understood when they arc considered apart from matter and material conditions. By the same departure from matter, therefore, someone can attain the goal of being intellect. If being divorced from matter causes some form to be made into something one with intellect, then to have been divorced from matter long before that is the reason why something is (already) intellect and understanding. Because no• body is further removed from matter than God, so nobody under­stands more perfectly than God. 
Understanding is desirable as a good. For through understand-2 ing each thing can enjoy itself and everything else. But nothing good is wanting to the prime good, that is, God. Again, every cause acts by means of form, and the more far-reaching the cause the more far-reaching the form through which it acts. God is the most far, reaching cause. So the most far-reaching form is in God. But nowhere is form more far-reaching than in mind. Therefore God possesses mind. This is further proved by the following argu• mcnc. Minds should not be instruments of a mover who lacks mind. But all minds arc instruments of God. The following argu· mcnr supports this too. Since essence and activity arc one and the same in God, His activity consequently must be in rhe class of ac­tivities chat do not spill over into external matter, but remain in the agent, as His perfections rather than matter's. Knowledge and desire arc of this kind. So in God there is at least knowledge, chat is, understanding or something higher than understanding. Be­cause God's understanding is the prime understanding and what• ever is chc first in a genus is pure, alone and self-sufficient, in chis understanding, therefore, being and knowing arc completely idcn• tical. For were being one thing, knowing another, then we would be forced to locate the understanding itself in something else, char is, in essence [rather than being]. 
If the first understanding is there [in God], it is assuredly the 3 most perfect. Such understanding is clearly what is the closest pos• siblc co the object char it has to understand. For in chis way it is utterly certain, wanting nothing and totally complete. But that un­derstanding is closest to knowing its object wherein the thing un• demanding understands itself. Thus God's own understanding is co understand Himself. This is especially so because, were God's understanding perfected by some external object, His essence, which is identical with His understanding, would be perfected by the same object, and God would be brought into being by some• thing else. Who would claim that the divine mind pursues things outside itself in order to undersr:md, when external things are compelled to pursue the divine mind in order to exist~ Who would place the proper object of rhe divine mind outside God when no power is able to exceed its object, but God infinitely ex­ceeds all things~ 
When we call God intellect and understanding, we muse realize 4 rhar rhe terms should be understood causally rather than formally. Strictly speaking, we consider angel co be mind and God to be above mind such that He is the mind of minds and the light of lights. Whatever God understands He understands in a manner chat is beyond understanding and-co come to our theme -He understands each individual. For whatever intellect docs it docs through its own nature and thus it aces through understanding. Therefore it must understand everything it creates. In art or in the making of decisions chis is obvious. Since God aces through His being and that being does not lack intellect, or rather, since, be­cause of God's complete simplicity, His being and understanding arc identical, it muse be that He aces by understanding. God's knowledge and activity are coextensive; for in God, because He is entirely simple, freely co know and co act are identical. His activity extends down to chc least of things. Therefore God understands all the smallest things; and che more so, because whoever knows all the causes of rhe smallest rhings understands the smallest rhings. But God knows every cause since He knows Himself. He is the cause of all. So in knowing che first and highest cause ofall causes and things, He knows all things. 
God knows them, I should add, distinctly and with utmost clarity. In seeing Himself as the cause of angel, He sees angel wich utmost clarity. In seeing angel, by way of angel (if He needs to) He secs its works as by way of its own cause; and again, with ut· most clarity, He secs by way of these works their works. So God possesses chc highest cause of chc lowest things and the intermedi­ary causes and che immediate causes, and so He can distinguish chem clearly, although He does not need to look outside Himself at the ulcimace effects in the secondary causes, since He is the prime source of His own being and the cause of being in all the secondary causes. So when he looks at Himself, He looks at the totality of all things -looks at the totality clearly and distinccly.22 For if He knows Himself perfectly, He knows the full extent of His own power. His power extends through individual objects. Therefore He knows individual objects. Likewise, when He looks at His own essence and goodness waiting to be imparted to all things, He secs in how many ways that goodness of His can be imparted to them. The variety of things created in nature corre• sponds to the variety of ways in which the divine essence and goodness is imparted to them. So, through the distinct knowledge of His goodness, He secs the distinct properties of individual things. For the highest understanding should lack no genus of un• derstanding. Thus God has understanding not only of genera and species, as some have claimed, but ofindividual things as well. For knowledge of each individual thing is desirable as a good, and God lacks nothing that is good. 
A further argument. A higher power should know all chat a 6 lower power knows and more. This is clear in the case ofour own souls. What each of our five senses perceives separately our phan• tasy discerns in summary fashion and to some extent more excel• lcntly. What the phantasy secs in many images, the intellect secs in a single image and more clearly: it secs the individual objects chat the phancasy secs, bur in addition it secs the universal rational principles which the phantasy is unaware of. Thus God with one power knows everything we come to know with three powers, that is, with the senses, the phantasy, and the intellect. Therefore God secs universal and individual things. 21 He sees all the modes ofbe• ing, bec:iusc He gazes at being's source and comprehends its whole nature. If this is so, then He clearly secs individual objects, which arc distinguished from each other by their different modes of be­ing. That is why Orpheus says: "Jupiter's eye is perfect, for all that occurs amongst us Fate and Jupiter's mind perceive throughout the universc."24 
No one should therefore believe Epicurus25 and Avcrrocs16 7 when they say char knowledge of the meanest things is unworthy of the divine majesty. For God secs things not in chcmsclvcs bur in Himself, not through their images but through His own essence. Their large number does not perplex Him for He secs them all as 
• BOOK II • CHAPTER IX · 
one. He never has to make an effort, for He docs not have to look for them: He possesses chem. Nor docs He have to turn away from more important matters to consider trivial ones, for He sees both with the same glance like an eye which sees many stars in the sky at a single glance. Are you not aware, Averroes you blas­phemer, chat the good of the universal order is more eminent than the quality of any of its parts~ Your own Aristotle in the eleventh book of his Metapl,ysics claims that individual pares are led back to the good of the order which is in the whole as to their end.27 If God therefore knows any other noble entity ( which you do not deny), then first and foremost He will know rhe universal order. Such an order can only be understood if the more and less valu­able parts arc distinguished among themselves; for the order of the whole consists in their intervals and proportions. Remember chat things which arc commonly considered without value, like the things we hold of most value, have all been constructed with the most consummate art. Remember coo chat these valueless things, seen in isolation, are deemed for the most part fur from beautiful. Yet they most apcly accord both with themselves and with every• thing else in the whole order and in the orderer of the whole. Orpheus sang of all this in his "Hymn to Apollo": "You possess the limits of the whole world. The beginning and the end arc in your care. Through you everything flourishes. You tune the whole sphere with the sound of your lyre."28 
: X : 
God understands infinite things. 
True reason reaches us chat God knows not only individual 1 things-even the lowest-bur also things infinite. 
If God has perfect knowledge of His power, then He has a dis-2 rincr knowledge of everything over which He has power. For the amount of power is reckoned in terms of the number of things it can do. Bur God's power, since it is infinite, extends co things without number. Therefore God knows things without numbcr.29 God's knowledge extends itself utterly through all things which arc said to exist, irrespective of the way in which they exist or arc said to exist. He must therefore understand clearly nor only what exists in act bur all that arc held to exist in potency as well. Among natural objects there arc some things which arc potentially though not actually infinite: the receiving capacity of matter, the progression of movement and time, the process of generation, the division of what is continuous, the mulciplicarion of number. Therefore God clearly understands infinite things, just as unity, which is the source of numbers, would see infinite numbers in ace if it could sec the numbers which are in it in potentiality. For unity is porcntially every number. 
God sees everything through His essence as if it were a para-3 digm. Since this essence contains infinite perfection, innumerable objects can be fashioned in its likeness, in such a way char the scale ascends gradually through innumerable levels of ever increasing perfection. For no single thing formed in chis way, nor any finite multitude of such things, however large, can ever rake possession of the complete perfection of the infinite paradigm. There is al­ways and endlessly a new way in which something else can further imitate rhe paradigm. Looking down through the innumerable lev­els of the infinite paradigm, therefore, God secs innumerable im• ages. In God being and understanding arc completely identical. Thus, just as His being is infinite, so is His understanding in• finite. Since the human intellect has the power to know things that are potentially infinite, it can multiply the number series to infinity, and it can go on at will with many other series endlessly. Bue if the divine intellect docs not understand the things which are actually infinite, and its vision is limited to a fixed number, then I pose the question: Can it or can it not understand anything more~ If it can, then God docs not actually understand everything He has the power to understand. If it cannot, then the human in• tcllect can understand more than the divine. Either proposition is absurd. So it understands infinite things in act. Because rhc divine mind is infinite, the Orphics rightly call it, "the infinite eyc."30 
1l1esc arguments dispose of the impious error ofthose philoso• 4 phers who thought that God only sees what is finite on the grounds that what is seen by Him is comprehended and what is comprehended is necessarily determined. To this I would now re• spond that God and the things seen in God by God arc the same. So whoever says chat they arc comprehended by God is saying nothing other rl1an that they arc comprehended by themselves. It would be absurd for an infinite thing co be comprehended by an­other. But it is not absurd for ir to be comprehended by itself. Bur this just means that it extends through itself and is completely equal to itself. Thus the infinite God does not confine Himself when He looks on His infinite self in an infinite manner. Rather, He confirms His own infinity. Nor is it absurd co say that God secs an unlimited number of things. For He docs not sec them by gradually counting them, but by intuiting them all together. And just as He secs many things as one when He regards them via a single species in a single act of vision, so He secs an infinite plural­ity as finite, as something, in other words, chat in its essence is en• tirely simple but is conceptually as it were multiple. For God re• 
gards His own form, which is in truth one form, as in power and in a certain respect omniform. It is as though the light of the Sun, the source of all color, which is as it were one-colored, were to sec itself as all-colored. 
: XI 
God possesses will and pe,jorms all actions e.xternal to Himself through His will. 
Every cause acts through some form and produces its effect which 1 is in a way like its form; and therefore the form of the effect must be comprehended by the cause. As God is the cause of all, neces­sarily the forms of all arc in Him. God is therefore in essence omniform. Hence the Orphic saying: "Jupiter, form of all."11 In pure potency, which is matter, exist all the natural forms con• fusccUy and potentially. Similarly, in pure act, which is God, exist all the forms distinctly and actually. But, really, are these forms differentiated in God as they would be in the way of nature, just as light, heat, dryness and lightness arc in fire; and does He act through them prompted by some necessity of His narurd Cer• cainly not. 
The first proof. Since God makes everything, if He acts 2 through such differentiated natural forms, He will be far more manifold and more compounded than any ocher cause, whether these forms in Him are part of His essence or accidental. But God has to be the simplest of all. Hence they cannot be essential, for then no essence would ever be less one in itself than the divine es­sence. Nor can they be accidental, for how can God acquire quali­ties? They cannot come from elsewhere, for God cannot be acted upon in any way by anything. Nor can they come from Himself, for were He co acquire them from Himself. then as donor He would be acting the agent's role, and as recipient the subject's. But the prime agent and pure ace, to which everything is subject, can• not itself undergo the condition of being a subject. 32 Again, sub­stance docs not depend on accident, although accident depends on substance. What docs not depend on something else can exist apart from it. So a substance can cxisc independently of the condi­tions and limits char govern [its) accidents. All the freedom and good that can ever exist is able co exist through the power of the Lord and Good on high. TI1crcforc God already is actually that very substance which can exist, or rather, chat substance which is free from accidents. 
TI1c following argument leads co the same conclusion. Elfcccs 3 arc found existing in causes higher than themselves in a way supe• rior co the way they exist in themselves. TI1us in chc highest cause they arc found existing in the highest way possible. Bue since the effects ofGod are in themselves substances, they must not exist in any way in God as :iccidents. Yee substances do not exist in God as m:iny. TI1erefore they are all one in Him, arc His very substance, since everything has co be found in God in the most perfect w:iy possible, and has to be in perfect union both with God and with itself. In God they c:innot be in a more sublime way, or more sub­limely united both with Him and with themselves, than by being God Himself in God. So in God the universal forms are not dilfcrcnciaccd in the way of nature, :ire not forms by which :ts by some natural necessity He would be led co ace, as :t fire co burn.ll 
TI1e second proof. TI1e n:tture of a thing is a sore of form or 4 power limited in a certain way co producing one particular result, doing whatever it does wicl1 all its force :1.nd doing it of necessity. If indeed the hoc nature of fire m:tinly produces one resulc, the elfect of hear, and if ic always he:1.cs in the s:1.mc manner, and, insofar as it c:in, burns everywhere with all the degrees ofhcac, then the face th:ic one material is heated to one temperature and :1.nocher to a temperature twice as hot results not from [fire as] the agent rcgu• lating it, but from the determination of the degrees of intensity found in the dispositions of the materials. So fire docs not control the result in its entirety. For it is not the cause of the dctermina• tion of the degrees of heat in what burns. Suppose fire produced two temperatures independently of the materials. Because it would be producing them totally by itself. the temperatures would be equal to each other. Or rather, the fire now generates completely similar and equal temperatures in fuels which arc entirely alike. Narure undoubtedly can produce diverse effects either from di­verse materials or through diverse means. Take away dtc diversity of means or materials, however, and it produces the same one or a very similar result. Nor can it not produce when material is pres• cnt. God alone creates the prime matter of bodies and as many cs· sences of minds and rational souls as possible without an interme­diary or a substrate. These differ vasdy from each other and are mutually separated by many degrees of perfection. Ir is not sur­prising that God, being the prime agent, has such lordship over His entire creation char He Himself can bring forms into being, set them in order, and differentiate one degree from another. But no agent would produce fewer or less varied effects than God, or rather God would do just one thing, if He acted only by way of an unadorned nature, divine nature being the simplest of all. There­fore no [mere] natural instinct impels God to action.J4 
The third proof. If understanding is effective in us and even s more effective in the angels, then it has to be most effective in God. In God His nature and understanding are identical. Now chc natural and intellectual modes of acting arc also everywhere customarily the same, since nature and understanding alike act through form and enact something similar in form. So one should not say that God acts either through an unadorned nature or through extrinsic understanding. Rather, He acts through [His] intellectual nature and natural understanding. Because He is chc prime, universal and most propitious cause, natural acc1v1ty is proper co God, being prior to, and more universal and more easy chan, ocher accivicics. On the ocher hand, because He is chc most precious cause, proper co Him is inccllcccual activity, which in us is chc first in dignity if not in time and so it is first in the universal order; and as che most precious activity, it is in accord only wich the more eminent species. Thus both activities arc the proper ac• civity of God. However, for chc Platonists, in the divine essence insofar as it is God there is just one property. Thus in God che two activities arc identical. 
l11c fourth proof. A mere nature looks to particular goods, but 6 an inccllcccual nature to the universal good. So the cause chac aces through an unadorned nature compared co che cause that acts through an incellcctual nature is like a particular cause compared to a universal one, or an assistant to an architect. Tims the archi­tect of the world, insofar as He is intellectual, acts through [His) intcllcccual nature. 35 
The fifth proof. Tlic sort of activity which best accords with 7 God is chc one chac docs not undermine His changclcssness or His simplicity. Such above all is the accivity of mind. The activity of nature starts in the agent, but ceases in chc object acted on, just as heating goes from the fire to the fuel. Bur intellectual activity retains both termini in the agent. For through inrellecrual activity God, while He is engaged in contemplating Himself, is every­where pondering external things; and thus, as Parmcnides the Py­thagorean puts it, 36 He makes the universal moving orb rotate while He remains motionless Himself. Moreover, God muse be utterly uniform because He exists above the forms of all things. Or rather, He muse be omniform because He is the giver of forms to everything. Thar He can be uniform and omniform at chc same rime is due solely to [His] inrcllccrual nature. Through ic God's form, in regarding itself, conceives of itself as the rational principle proper to all foms. For it secs in itself whatever is proper to each form when it discerns to what degree something can imitate the divine form and to what degree fall shore of it. For instance, when it understands its own form as imitable in the mode of life bur not of knowledge ( if I may put it like that), then it is conceiving of the form and idea of planes; bur when as imitable in the mode of knowledge but not of understanding, then it is conceiving of the idea proper to the animal, and so onY In everything that happens not by chance but by nature or design, the goal of the effecting process is necessarily the form of the work effected. But the active cause directs the action towards that form not on account of something else but through the form abiding in itself. It does not direct the action towards particular forms except by way of certain forms or certain rational principles of forms, rational principles conceived in itself. Thus, since the amazing order of the world could not come about through chance devoid of order, {its) form must necessarily exist in the understanding of its maker, in whose likeness it is made. And since the order of the universe is the most important for God's plan, the principal idea with Him is the idea of the universe's order. But one cannot conceive of the rational principle of the order and the whole unless one [first] conceives of the rational principles proper to all the parts from which the whole is constiruted, just as an architect cannot conceive of the ap· pearance of a building unless he has conceived of the reasons proper to its parts. 
Properly then the rational principles of all things are in God. 38 Things' species derive their distinctions whence they derive their being. Nor is the divine simplicity any less simple on account of this multitude ofideas, since God perceives them all by way ofone form and at a single glance. The divine essence is called an idea not according as it is essence absolutely, but insofar as it is the model of this or that species. Thus, insofar as the many rational principles deriving from one essence are understood to be many, to chat extent the ideas are said to be many; and such relarions39 (by which the ideas arc multiplied) result nor from things themselves bur rather from the divine intellect comparing irs own essence co things. Such relations are nor, so to speak, real in the same way as chc relations arc real by which persons0 arc said co be disrin• guishcd, but rather arc relations of the inrcllcct. Under one idea many things arc known and arc brought into being. Some things arc even apprehended through the idea of their opposite, as evil and privation through the idea of good and of habit, or, as some people think, matter through the idea of form. So the properties of a substance are known tbrough the idea of char substance, whereas che common qualities arc designated by their own ideas, just as an architect realizes all the accidental characteristics which accompany a house from its beginning by way of the form of the house itself. Bue additions to tbe house after its completion, pie• 

turcs and such like, arc arranged by way of other ideas. 
I have treated the subject of ideas at greater length than I in• 9 tended, caking the opporruniry that chance offered. Although some dogs may bark to a different tune, these arc the views of our beloved Plato and the Placonists, and most true they arc. What I have also just touched on above I will demonstrate more fully else• where. 
So far I have shown that rhc first cause produces His various 10 effects through the manifold structure of His wisdom rather than through any compulsion of {His) unadorned and simple nature. Now I shall show, God willing, that He docs nor produce these effects outside Himself through His pure understanding unless, additionally, His will assents. TI1is was the goal, after all, of this discussion. 
The first proof. Through itself the first cause, as I shall demon· 11 
srrate below, guides everything to the best end by the most direct 
routes and in chc most appropriate way. It cannot do chis unless, 
through its intellect, it anticipates che end, discerns the routes, and measures che proportion between the routes and the end; and unless, through its will, it approves the end, and chooses one par­ticular route over the othcrs.41 Hence in the Timaeus, the Pl,aedo, the Plnlebus and the Statesma11,42 Plato expressed his abhorrence of chose philosophers who refer the causes of narural things either ro fortune or co some necessity of matter or of nature. He himself considers natural things the instruments of understanding rather than as agents, and everywhere he refers all individual effects back principally ro che final, efficient, and formal cause. Thus if you ask him why the world is round, his reply is that it is so because it participates in the idea of roundness, and chat the craftsman of the world in His wisdom fashioned it in the likeness of chat idea, since He adjudged and willed char for the goad's sake it would be better so. 
The second proof. What accompanies whatever exists belongs 12 to that entity as an entity. Such has co be found present in char which is the first being. But whatever exists will both desire the absent good and rest content most willingly in the present good. The nature, sense and intellect all desire rhe absent good and em• brace che present good. The nature devoid ofsense does it entirely through some inclination, whereas sense docs it through desire, and the intellect through the will. Therefore, since God is -to speak like an Aristotelian-the prime being, who can deny that the divine intellect freely embraces its own present good, which is the whole good, through the will? Just as God in His own truth sees all the true things which arc made true by truth illuminating them, so in His own goodness He wills all the good things which are born good by the propagation of goodness and by its perfect­ing them. Bur mind fashions all its works by willing rather than by seeing. For by seeing it reflects upon the forms within, whereas by willing it unfolds chem without. By seeing it gazes at the true whose property is purity, whereas by willing it attains the good whose property is [its) diffusion.41 
• BOOK ll • CHAPTER XI · 
111c third proof. The knowledge chat comes from the senses 13 and the intellect, because it is in created things like something imaginary, produces no substantial effect except through an affect [of the will],41 in that it seems to be something essential. Hence the stronger the will is affected, the more powerfully it acts. A good example in a way is the ostrich's eye so avidly fixed on its egg. IfGod's understanding is more effective in creating than the ostrich's gaze in hatching an egg, or rather if it is superlatively effective -and this is proved by the fact that in creating it needs no substrate, no instrument and no time -then we can conjecture that the affect of the will is most powerful in the divine under• standing. One might adJ that the affect has to be most joyful there, if only because the divine undemanding-which is utterly perfect and always and everywhere enjoys the most complete anJ perfect object-has to be the most delightful. 
The fourth proof. Will is chc inclination of che mind cowards 14 the good, and where it does nor exist the mind has no pleasure; for pleasure is the dilation [ or reaching out] of the will towards the good and the repose of the will in the good. If there were no pleasure where the good is, there would be no pleasure anywhere, for wherever pleasure exists it comes by reason of the good. So pleasure and will arc in the good itself. The affect {of the will], if ic is the starting point of generation in creatures, is certainly the origin of creation in the Creator Himself. 
The fifth proof. If all agents, whether naturally or artfully, order 15 their works towards an end, namely the good, and if they do this by their goodness while accepting the order of Joing it from the prime agent (and that is the good itself), then it is agreed that the good orders its works cowards the best of ends. For if particular goods, because they arc good and because they arc ordered by the highest good, order individual things towards a particular good, how much more will the universal good direct all things towards the good, that is, towards the universal good~ So God draws all 
177 
things towards Himself as the end. For there is no end of divine action outside God, because the end is located in the same order as the agent that moves things towards the end. The end is some­thing good and it moves the moving cause. But nothing can belong to the same order as God except God. God is not a slave to a good outside Himself. For the universal good is never a slave to a particular good. Moreover, God is not moved by another. If God's end is His own goodness, God in His own way desires and loves His own goodness. But since God is intellectual and His goodness is intelligible, He loves ir with an intellectual love. Such love in­volves the will. God therefore wills Himself. He wills Himself as His own end and as the end of everything else. But activity in re­spect to things that are directed towards the end springs from the will for the end. So the divine will, as Plato says in the Ttmaeus,•s is the beginning of all created things.46 We find the same view ex, pressed time and again in Mercury TrismegisrusY They both be­lieve that the principle of the universe must have the most perfect mode of action: that He, who is the lord of all that is made, must through His will be the lord of all making, and by "lord" I mean He who disposes by His free will. For if He acted by the necessity of [His} nature or understanding, He would enact all things and infinite things at the same time, and in one moment compel indi­vidual things to be and [yet] destroy them. 
: XII : 
The will ofGod is necessary and free at the same time and acts freely. 
I chink it has been sufficiently shown chat God creates individual 1 things not through any necessity of [His] nature or understand­ing, but through (His] will's command. Now I have to demon· strate, I think, how His will is necessary and free at the same time. 
The first proof. Every person should take extreme care not to 2 fall unawares into the mindless blasphemy of ever supposing char God exists and aces by chance. If nothing ever is or docs by chance what it is and does naturally-fire, for instance, does not happen by chance but is hot and makes things hot of necessity-but if it is natural for the highest being to be and for the highest ace co act, then it follows chat God, who is the highest being (and more than being) and the highest act, cannot be or act in any way contin­gencly. If there is less of chance where there is more of reason, nothing can be supposed fortuitous in God who is the highest rca· son and the fount of reason. If fortune docs nor produce rea• son, since it is reason's contrary, nay, the taking away or lack of reason, how can it produce either God or any divine action supe• rior to any reason? If God is chat rational law which so orders the universe that it strips away all contingency from the things which follow it most closely, how could it happen by chance chat God thus exists and acts? Wherefore God does not exist and ace thus by chance-otherwise it would be impossible to find order any­where-but as it behooved Him, nay as it behooves Him. It behooves Him because it is becoming. Bue comeliness itself is God Himself from whom and through whom all things are be­coming. Or rather, He is and He acts as it is necessary. It is neces­sary through necessity itself. But necessity is God Himself, and 
through Him all other necessary things arc necessary. Therefore God is as He is, and acts as He acts. Since nccessiry is not subject to necessity, in God, accordingly, is the highest freedom. Freedom is desirable as a good. Bue in the highest good is everything that can ever be desired as good. Whoever lives as he wants co live is free. But goodness itself, above all other goods, lives as it wants to live and every will wanes its life and no will wants anything except it. God is what He is such that He could not be something else, because He is, so to speak, all being and all power; or rather, He would not want ro be something else because He is all good. But co be able or to want co be different would be weakness or folly, and would ensure (His] degeneration, nay fHis] annihilation. 
The second proof. If the stimulus ofthe good in individual en• 3 cities is the most necessary ofall things and yet the most voluntary and spontaneous, certainly the highest necessity of nature along with the highest freedom of the will meet in the good itself (as I have demonstrated elsewhere). There the necessity of nature con• firms the freedom of the will, and freedom so accords with nee• essity chat God is necessarily free and willing and willingly nec­essary. 
The third proof. As long as something has almost no share of 4 the good, it is displeasing to itself and desires something ocher than itself. Bue when it comes to participate in the good, it is now pleasing to itselfand wants itself and is now such as it wanes co be; and the more it achieves this goal, the more pleasing it is co itself and the more it is such as it wants itself to be. So the good itself is preeminently such that it most wants itself and is pleasing to itself and is utterly such as it wanes itself to be. 
The fourth proof. If the closer things get to God, the less sub-5 servient they are, and the more independent they become, then God is independent to the highest degree, so that not only docs He want things such as He is Himselfin His own nature, but also He is completely such as He wanes to be; on the ocher hand, He docs such things too as He wants to do :ind He does them for His own sake. For no agent will ever be the free beginning of its own action or prescribe the end to its own action unless it is the begin­ning and end of the universe: unless it is the lord ofits own action and has prescribed an end to its own action. But let us return to the argument. 
The fifth proof. In chose things where being, understanding 6 and willing are truly at odds there is no absolute freedom, because in things ofthis kind the manner of willing follows the rule ofun­derstanding, and chis in turn follows the condition of being, and being follows che one who gave it being. But in God being, under­standing, and willing are truly identical. Wherefore He is com• pounded of His understanding and essence by means of His will, such chat not only docs He will just as He is and as He under­stands in His own nature, but He also understands and exists just as He wills. That is perhaps why the disciples of Zoroaster teach us chat God in some way enacts Himself. Plotinus has explained chis more or less as follows: God is act, not of another, not for an­other, but of Himself and for Himself. 48 For He is act remaining within itself. But because such ace is infinitely abundant on ac· count of the nature of the infinite good, it docs not lack what is acted, produced in other words, and char is infinite. Bur since an internal act has an internal product, and since God alone is in­finite, what is thence acted, that is, produced, is within God, in­deed is God Himself. God is act, unslccping and perpetual, from Himself, in Himself, and wholly with regard to Himself. Thus as He acts and keeps watch so He exists absolutely. The whole thrust of the divine ace is centered on itself. Yet as long as God thus de­pends on Himself, in a way He enacts Himself, produces Himself in ocher words, because if He looked co another He would destroy Himself. So divine being is act directed towards itself, since divine not-being would be act directed towards another. God wills Him­self. Bur willing and doing-indeed even being-are utterly iden­
tical. Therefore, by willing Himself, He enacts Himself. chat is to say, He produces Himself; or rather, He already puts Himself or impresses Himself into being. Plocinus wishes to conclude from this chat God is not as He is by chance or as necessity compels, but as He Himself keeps watch, and acts, and wills. Bur Ice God Himself resolve such mysteries. As for me, I choose at all points only to affirm what befits God, as in the argument above when I argued chat che highest freedom and the highest necessity conjoin in God. 
The sixth proof. Divine goodness alone is the absolute object of 7 the divine mind. For a faculty can equal its object but cannot ex• ceed it. But nothing exists outside God chat God cannot exceed. God wills Himself with an absolute necessity of His will. For all things necessarily want their ultimate end. Divine goodness is God's ultimate end, and for its sake He wills whatever He wills. We must therefore either confess chat God wills nothing and is devoid of all preference, which is absurd; or we must affirm chat, if He docs will, He necessarily wills Himself, especially since being and willing arc identical in God. By willing Himself, He wills all other things, which, to the extent chat chey arc in God, arc God Himself; and to the extent that they emanate from God, are im­ages of the divine countenance and arc set in order for the princi• pal purpose of referring co and confirming the divine goodness. But the act ofthe divine will, which insofar as it regards the divine goodness is absolutely necessary, this act, I say, insofar as it regards creatures, some people pronounce not absolutely necessary. For al­though the will necessarily completely wills its own end, yet it wills those things which arc means co the end by a conditional ne· cessiry; or rather, it sometimes even wills with no necessity at all. if among them there is anything in the absence of which the end is still attainable. The divine goodness, however, has no need of ere· aced things.49 
The seventh proof. Confirming this is the face char God, in 8 
willing His own goodness, wills other goods for no other reason except as images of Himself. But since the divine goodness is mea• surcless, innumerable images can be fashioned after its likeness ­innumerable in the sense of over and beyond the images which have been fashioned in this world already. If it necessarily followed from the fact that He wills His own goodness that He would will objects ro exist which can imitate His goodness, then He would certainly will infinite creatures to exist which represent the divine goodness in infinite ways. But if He should [so] will, then they would exist. We should remember at this point, however, that our divine Thomas Aquinas, theology's splendor, was of the opinion that although the act of the divine will, in terms of a particular condition or position, can be said necessarily ro will chis or that thing (after God has once willed it, chat is, since the divine will is as immutable as the [divine] essence), yet God in His own nature does not have char respect of absolute necessity with regard to His effects as He has ro Himself. 50 
The eighth proof. If God is the perfect cause of an entity and g an entity is properly an effect of God, then God's ace can extend itself at least as far as an entity's potentiality can be extended, es• pecially since the passive potentiality must be led by the higher act. But whatever is contained in this entity's potentiality is not opposed to the entity's rational principle, just as in the potential­ity of corporeal nature arc all rhe things which do not detract from corporeal narure. One can imagine nothing which is in con• flier with an entity's rational principle except its opposite, which is called a non-entity. Contradiction alone includes the rational principle of a non-entity. Therefore, as the Peripatetics maintain, whatever includes no contradiction is included in an entity's po• tentiality; and God can make all such things. This is confirmed by the fact char, if we exclude contradiction, mind can extend itself through the whole expanse, nay through the measureless expanse, of being.51 Bue God's power to effect should not be less abundant than the mind's potentiality co devise. In addition, if the divine in­tellect contemplates innumerable goods, and if His will can turn towards all che things His intellect presents to it as good, rhen God's will cannot be confined to finite objects. Therefore His power too extends to infinite things. What is che point here? To help you understand chat whatever docs not include conrradicrion is subject co rhe divine power. To help you realize coo [first], since many things do not naturally exist, and yet, if they did, they would involve no contradiction (as is particularly obvious in the case of the number and size of the stars and the distances between them), char many things arc contained under rhe divine power which are nowhere to be found in the order of nature; and [sec• ond], since God makes, and does not make, only some of the things in His power to make, chat He docs such by the fi-ec choice of His will, and nor by any necessity ofeither His nature, His un• dcrstanding or His will.52 
The ninth proof. Thar God works through a choice (if I may 10 call it that) is a reasonable proposition. For all the agents which by way ofsomething else act and are led to acting muse be led back to the prime agent. This acts through itself in such a way chat it can lead itself to acting, and therefore turn itself totally cowards ics own action, and therefore understand and will either co ace or not to ace, and again to act in the same way or otherwise. Bur nobody can be unaware char actions that proceed fi-om God in chis way are the result of [His] free choice. No wise man, nevertheless, can be unaware char in God choice docs not differ fi-om essence. 
Lese someone chink perhaps chat the divine will, whenever it looks 11 to created things, imposes its power on individuals, we should re• call chat the will ofGod puts the good of the whole before the ap• parent advantage ofany particular small part. For in the whole the image of the divine goodness shines our the more dearly. The good ofthe whole clearly consists in some sort oforder. This care• 
191 
fully worked-out order requires that all the grades of things be contained in the universe, such that some arc causes at rest, others moving causes, and that those which arc moving arc producing effects, moreover, which arc more erratic, and producing chem in a variable way. For effects seem to imitate the manner rather of their immediate causes than that of their more distant ones. But God not only wills things themselves to exist, He also wills rhe ways of being which arc required for them consequently. Since some things, however, by way of their own nature arc meant to be con­tingent one might say, God chooses, as some theologians put it, for something to happen, as it were, contingently. But nothing strays so fur offtrack that it troubles the universal order or escapes the providence of the orderer.SJ 
: XIII : 
God loves and provides for His creation. 
If God pleases Himself, if He loves Himself, certainly He loves His images and His works. A craftsman loves the works which he makes from external matter. Far greater is the love of a father for che son he has conceived from matter within, even though he first received the matter from elsewhere when he ate. God loves all His works even more intensely, since He did not receive the matter from elsewhere, but He created it Himself-He who also gave it form -whence He alone was rhe cause of the whole work. IfGod so loves His works, He wills good things for them. \.Vhat He wills, He attains. So He fashions them well: in His highest good­ness He fashions chem in the best possible way. For just as the fruitfulness in all agents and their proneness for action has been implanted by the fruitfulness of the prime agent, so the innate concern felt by individuals for their works comes from the primary concern of the prime agent, who looks after everything as His sons. To the degree His fruitfulness exceeds that in all other things, His providence is the more caring. 
God docs everything for His own sake. For if He acted for any 2 other end than Himself, His action would depend on that end: and His will to act would depend on the same end, and so would He Himself ( since God and His will arc identical). If He docs everything for His own end and He Himself is the highest good, then He disposes everything for the good, as Plato says in the Trmaem.s.i with the resulr char individual things receive the di­vine goodness each according to its nature. Furthermore, since all things desire the good and the desire for the good is good ( and therefore comes from chc prime good which is che source of all goods), it follows char things seek the divine goodness attracted by the divine goodness. How can one deny char God is at the helm when He steers everything cowards the good? 
How do the different clements and components of the world 3 chat arc naturally opposed to each other in form or power combine into one and remain bound together for such a length of rime, and exchange natures and motions among themselves and arc chem• selves exchanged, if they arc not linked together by a more cmi• ncnc power? Ifchc government of the world were left to these mu· tually conAiccing members, chose kept in balance by their own weight and separated in space would not intermingle. If they did, they would produce nothing ocher chan things char were hoc, cold, dry, wet, rare, dense, and the rest of the like qualities. They would not establish an order at all offorms, figures, or revolutions, seeing char such an order even in the arcs comes not from chc material or chc cools but from the chinking alone of the craftsman. Although heaven in a way rules the elements, yet it docs not so rule without itself being ruled from elsewhere. For in it such a great variety of forms, powers, and motions arc arranged in one stable order nor 
by the heaven's bodies themselves, which arc naturally diverse and in motion, but by a higher power, which is through itself one and motionless. Finally, a narur.tl agent, whether elemental or celcsrial, both because it is mobile and therefore, being deficient and imper• feet, always depends on another, and because by the necessity of its narure and its whole self it docs whatever it docs, accordingly is allotted by some supernal ruler the measure and manner of acting which is appropriate for proceeding via specific steps to a specific end. For either formally or potentially heat in its simplicity ev­erywhere and totally melts, while cold freezes. But chat the one melrs in an appropriate or useful way, while chc ocher for a like reason freezes, and chat they do so in a continuing and orderly way, chis they derive not from simple narure, not from chance, but from a supernal cause. Since the spheres in their continuous mo• cion, departing continuously from their present habitual condi­tion, find no rest in themselves, they receive their existence and their morion from another; and chis possesses the end for whose sake they arc moved and ace, since the end by a necessary inten• tion55 precedes the motions towards che end. Hence Aristotle writes in his Metaphysics: "Just as the order of the parts ofan army with respect to themselves and to the whole stems from the order of the whole wich respect ro its leader, so the order of che world's pares with respect co themselves and co the whole depends on the order of che whole with respect to God."56 From this he concludes char just as the order of an army is in its general, so the order of the world is in God, in che one and only leader of the universe. Therefore chc pares ofthe world and its every little body either al· ways or for the most part proceed to a specific end via a carefully planned route and che most appropriate ways; and they so proceed chat for the most part they perform their actions as well as they can be performed. It is as though they had some skill within, and a consummate skill at that; or rather, they proceed with such a wonderful reason that they outstrip human skill and reason. Since 
197 
the bodies arc unaware of their motions and accordingly arc un­able to appoint for themselves the end for which they arc making (making not by chance but necessarily), and since nonetheless they do have the appointed end ( otherwise they would no more pursue this end than another), then it is :i.greed that the end they seek is appointed for them by another. By its wisdom they arc led to­wards the end just as arrows arc aimed at the target by the archer's practiced skill. 
Where then is this wisdom~ If it is in God on high, then God 4 provides for things, since He reconciles mutual opposites so chat they do not destroy one another and leads chem all to the best possible ends. Bue if this wisdom were in any other thing below God, in angelic mind or in soul, it must srill be acknowledged that God moves all below Himself. So if angelic mind or some soul rules the world and leads ir towards the good, certainly it docs so led by God and the power of God. God then is the first and high­est ruler. He can provide for all if He can make all through His in­tellect. For it is more eminent to make by means of the under­standing than to think about and preserve what has been already made. If He knows how co make all. He knows how to govern all. Finally, He wills to govern and preserve what are His own, what He has made; and He docs nor begrudge them the gifts of well­being since He has not begrudged the gift of being. But He gov­erns everything with marvelous ease. For He is not dealing with alien materials which He has received from elsewhere, but with his own materials which He makes Himself. He does not affect them from without, but moves them from within. For He is pres­ent in the very heart of all things. He docs not toil away in many (actions]; rather, through His own being, which is the universal axis, He rotates the axes which follow upon it: essence, life, mind, soul, nature, matter. As someone who is a Platonist would say, by means of the axis appropriate to each order He rotates the appro­priate order itself: all essences by means of one essence, all lives by 
means of one life, all minds by means of one mind, similarly indi­vidual souls by mC:lns of one soul. individual natures by means of one nature, individual materials by means of one matter. Nothing resists His decree, for He is superior to everything by a measure· less distance. Divinely Orpheus sang of this divine nature: "Turn­ing (its) swift onrush on a perpetual axis.''s7 A sinew has been found near the nape of an animal's neck that when rugged moves all the animal's limbs simultaneously so that they arc individually moved each in its own way. According to Aristotle in his trC:ltisc On tlie World, the limbs of the world arc moved by God with a similar rug. se This manifestly asserts the existence of providence, which Aristotle also signifies in the tench book of the Nicomaclmm Ethics and in the Physics, where he shows that nature everywhere looks to a certain end-the best possible -and that its works arc the works of an understanding that docs not crr.s9 
We saw recently in Florence a small cabinet made by a German 5 craftsman in which statues ofdifferent animals were all connected to, and kept in balance by, a single ball. When the ball moved, they moved too, bur in different ways: some ran to the right, oth• crs to the left, upwards or downwards, some chat were sitting stood up, others that were standing fell down, some crowned och­ers, and they in turn wounded others. There was heard too the blare of trumpets and horns and the songs of birds; and other things happened there simultaneously and a host of similar events occurred, and merely from one movement of one ball. Thus God through His own being, which is in reality the same as His under• standing and His will, or is something entirely simple-the uni­versal center from whom {as we have declared elsewhere) the rest of things are drawn out like lines -has only to nod His head and everything which depends on Him trembles. 
Let us hear no more from Lucretius the Epicurean, who wants 6 
the world to come about and be borne along by chance, and who 
believes that the constant condition of its order, beautiful and full 
of forms, proceeds from an unstable and formless privation of or­der, as if someone were to suppose that wisdom was born from stupidity, or light from darkness.60 Tell me Lucretius, whenever you make a casual movement, without plan or purpose, do you al­ways proceed by a single direct route to the same specific goal? Of course not. You wander hither and thither. And when you are playing with stones, not using any skill and without a pre-estab· lished plan, do you erect a building with stoutly built walls all in order, a building extremely elegant to look at and ideally suited to its purpose? Of course not. What you make is a useless and un· sightly pile of scones. Think of plants and animals: their separate pares arc so designed char chc position of one is to the advantage ofanother; they serve each ocher. Certainly, when one is removed, the whole scrucrurc is virtually destroyed. Next, all their pares arc arranged for chc sake of the composite whole, and the composite itself, char is, the plant or animal, is equipped with the inscru• ments it needs co do the works of its own nature: the foods, chc habitats, and the seasons have been provided for all. Earth and water provide food for chem; che heavens temper the water and earth. In che end all che world's pares come together to form for tl1e whole world a unique harmonious beauty from which nothing can be subtracted and co which nothing can be :idded. If you had to provide for crces and animals using all your wisdom, would you have done it differently? No, nor differently, but nor as well. A wisdom greater than yours designed these things, otherwise day after day you would be seeing things everywhere with missing limbs or organs: dogs born from horse semen, Ii.gs from apples, human limbs :tttached co lions, humans with the limbs of asses, scars falling, and stones ascending. But in reality because the indi­vidual pares of che world, having been born from particular seeds and endowed with distinctive shapes, seek and seek again specific goals-seek chem by che most direct route, at the appropriate 
rimes and arrangements, and in a manner both very beautiful and 
ideally suited -it follows that they arc moved in che same way as those things enacted by human skill and design. 
If things arc moved in this same way, then it is by the same skill 7 almost and the same design; but by a design which is the more eminent co the degree char things are arranged more beautifully and with more stability-by a design, I say, which is neither changeable nor subject to motion bur absolutely certain and in• scant, and which is intuitive rather than discursive. For if no hesi­tation nor violation of rule nor correction occurs in his work, then there is no lack of certainty in chc craftsman. Using a metaphor we call such intuition a "design," not because some things in chis case arc known by way of ochers, but because some are done for che sake of others. People who arc unskilled usually seek counsel about making something. Bue a consummately skilled craftsman no longer deliberates: he works from habit just as nature docs with its forms. Bue ifperfect skill exists anywhere, it is in the making of this wonderful artifact, the world. Perhaps you will claim that chis skill resides in nature, which is devoid of all sense. But I would re­ply chat it is you who are devoid of sense if you are so far from having sense not to sec chat, if all che little beasts on earth have sense, much more must the whole world and nature, the universal craftsman, have sense -and by sense I mean rational sense, if na• ture designs its artifacts more rationally than man's reason can. Daily familiarity dulls our sense of wonder. Bue had your parents brought you up from infancy immured in a house so that you had never gazed upon this wonderful beauty of the world before you were thirty, then doubtless you would so wonder at this new spec­tacle of nature that, however much you had doubted beforehand, yet afterwards you could never doubt that all things arc made and ruled by the providence of the one all-knowing craftsman. 
Therefore we muse accept, 0 Lucretius, chat since the world's 8 pares and effects proceed in constant order, then of necessity the whole world itself cannot now proceed, nor could it have pro­cccded at its inception, without constancy and order. Next we have to accept chat the world docs not move of its own accord without life; nor is it revolved so long and so regularly without life at its most powerful; nor revolved in such an orderly manner with­out mind at its wisest; nor revolved so cxccllcndy and so aptly without the highest good. Bue a unique life, queen over rhc unique world body, excelling in power, wisdom, and goodness, has most providentially directed the world from the beginning and without ceasing towards the best. This life is either chc highest God, or a handmaid of the highest God. Ifit is the highest God, chcn clearly God is provident. God is provident too if life is His handmaid, since the lirst principle acts on and moves all for His sake. Or­pheus describes Jupiter in these divine words: "Father, beginning and end of all things."61 If the life of the world provides, guided certainly by God, it provides, therefore, for God's end. Thus all things arc directed finally to God's goodness. 

This goodness, since it has a care for its whole work, certainly 9 docs not neglect any of the parrs. For the excellence of the state and condition of the whole composite structure depends on the parts comprising it. Orpheus sums up the matter thus: "You sec all within, you hear all within, you distribute all."62 But since the world's structure as a whole has been established for rhc sake of recalling the divine goodness, and since rhc world's parts have been set in place for the sake of the structure, the absolutely highest perfection should nor be sought for in the whole work, bur only enough perfection to indicate, insofar as it can, the more sublime perfection of its author. In any one of the world's parts we should not demand any and every perfection of that part, but rather char which is in harmony with the remaining parts and connects it to the whole. 11,us, although any one condition of any particular part of the world may sometimes seem to be defective in itself, yet if we compare that condition to the state of the whole, then we will find that the world cannot be better arranged than it is. The Founder of the universe docs not refer the whole to any of its parts, but rather the parts to the whole. So what may seem bad or ugly as far as the parts arc concerned will in the end contribute justly to the beauty and good of the whole. That is why Orpheus calls God: "Sempiternal life and immortal providcncc."61 Mercury [Trismegisrus] says that this providence is the protectress of the human race.6• And in the Laws book four Plato declares that God contains the beginnings, middles, and ends of all things; that He encircles all and rightly disposes individual things; chat He is gra• cious to men who arc meek and devout even as He punishes the proud and the impious.6~ 


Plato supposes that providence docs not impair the freedom of 10 our will to choose, but rather serves that freedom -he explains this in the tench book of the Republic66 and in the Stausma11 and the Critim67 -because God makes not so much by knowing as by will­ing, otherwise He would have made and would make all things si­multaneously, and additionally would make bad things. Again, just as all future events arc written down in God's foreknowledge, so too are the causes of those events and their modes ofaction. Just as our deeds arc known to God, so too is our will which is the cause of our deeds and the manner of freely doing them. For just as He foresees what you arc going to do, so He foresees that you are going to do it voluntarily and freely. Wherefore the di­vine foreknowledge, if it renders our deeds necessary by imposing some condition, similarly it renders necessary -it confirms in ocher words -our manner of doing chem, that is, the freedom of our judgment. Because God, the universal moderator, preserves each thing, He docs not retract its nature once He has given it. Thus, while He rules over all, He rules over individuals according to the nature of each, helping the ascending clements in their as ­cent, the descending elements in their descent. If He rules over the movement of animals, He helps them to move forward be­cause their motion is naturally progressive. IfHe guides the heav• 
209 


ens, He helps them complete their full circuit because their natu• ral morion, given their rotundity, is to revolve. If He impels thinking souls, because they too revolve but arc free to go upwards or downwards, He freely impels them, so that He attracts them rather than dragging them along, persuades not compels them. Zoroaster attests to this: "The Father docs not inspire fear but leads by pcrsuasion.''68 
But since the prime mover has to prevail, has to rule, in Plato's 11 view it so compels thinking souls in a way towards the good that they cannot nor wish for the good.69 For all things necessarily want the good, and because of the good they want whatever they want, just as they necessarily want not to have the bad, and be­cause of rhc bad do not want whatever they do not want. For if the adequate object of the appetite or will is the good itself, then goodness is certainly the reason for the appetite desiring whatever it desires, so rhar in everything it desires it desires the good, just as the sight secs the light in every color. Bur if it desires to desire nothing further, then rhe will is choosing this emptying itself of desiring as the good. Therefore the thinking soul is necessarily borne towards the good. But because God has to preserve the na­ture proper to the thinking soul, He leaves its judgment free. Through this free judgment the soul can deliberate in its own manner about what it should do, judge from the many options be­fore it that one thing is better than another, and elect what it 
judges to be particularly appropriate for attaining the good. 



BOOK III 
: I : We descend through thefive levels by which we ascended and set up an appropriate comparison between them. 
So far we have made our ascent from body to quality, from quality 1 to soul, from soul co angel, and from angel to God, the one, the true and the good, author and ruler of all things. The Pythagore• ans describe body as "the many," quality as "the many and the one," soul as "the one and the many," angel as the "one-many," and God as "the one." Because body is undetermined with regard to any particular species and is by its own narure endlessly divided, so its matter, they claim, would be in flux infinitely if form did not call it to a halt and give it unity. Quality contributes to limiting matter by a species; it is in itself undivided in a way, but becomes divisible by being mixed with body. Soul limits matter by a spe• cies; it is not divisible either in itself or through the body's con· tamination but is a mobile plurality. Angel is the receptacle of (all] the species and is an immobile plurality. God is above the species, an unmoving unity. God, they say, is absolutely indissoluble, be­cause He is Himself unity and stability: bodies, however, being composed of clements, are completely dissoluble because in them plurality overcomes unity, and movement stability. But angels, souls, spheres, and stars, they say, appear dissoluble in a way in chat they contain parts; but they are indissoluble in that their unity and stability surpass their plurality and motion. This is what provides the divine bond whereby God, in Timaeus' view,1 always preserves things that arc in themselves dissoluble from dissolution. 
So powerful is the gifi: of unity itself and ofstability that only 2 at the lowest level of the universe docs it seem to be overtaken by its opposites {multiplicity and motion]. Yet even there the gift sometimes prevails in a way, since it continually keeps the matter, which is subject co infinite plurality and change, constant in the unity of substance and order. God, of course, is unity, as I have al­ready shown. He is immoveable, being moved neither by another, since nothing is stronger than He, nor by Himself, since He can­not pass over into anything better in that He is the good itself. Nothing, however, moves cowards the worse of its own accord. Bur ifsomeone were to say chat God flows from one thing into an­other, rhen we will ask whether or not He acquires anything new. If He acquires nothing new, then He has not been changed. If He acquires something new, then He did not possess all things before· hand. What docs not possess all things is not God. Because God is everywhere, He docs not change place. Because He is the end of all things, He docs nor move with respect to another. Because He is most simple, He docs not move even within Himself. For if He moved in Himself. He would either move one part of Himself to• wards another, or at least combine in Himself some new things with the old. For as regards substance, He would be what He was before, bur He would in addition assume a new form -in which case He would no longer be entirely simple. 


Again, God is unity itself. Unity is the basis of stability itself, 3 because, just as movement is a progression towards plurality, so stability rests in uniry. In any nature we call stable chat which con­tinually possesses one habitual condition such char ir never departs from the unity ofits nature. Bur who would suggest that the foun• dation of all stability is itself subject to changef We can confirm chis line of reasoning by turning to the arguments of Numenius the Pythagorean. 2 He declares that anything that changes in the past or the future contains some admixture of privation, for the future is not yet and the past is no longer. But in God, since He is the prime being and highest act, there is no privation. Therefore God is unchangeable. 


Angel too is not subject to movement, because it drinks in 4 goodness from God, the fount of all goodness, through itself, without any intermediary; and at one pcint in eternity it is filled, and it remains brimful with goodness forever. But since every effect that is produced ourside its cause retains something of its cause and yet emerges inferior also to the cause, angel, being ere· aced closest to God, retains and yet loses something of God. God possesses unity and stability, Angel cannot retain both; for then it would be God, not angel. Yet it docs not lose both either, for the first of God's works and the nearest to Hirn would then emerge as completely unlike its maker. So which docs it retain, unity alone or stability~ It cannot have unity alone without stability; for unity is utterly motionless. So it will retain stability but fall away from simple unity, the result being that angel is plurality without move• ment. Indeed, it is quite reasonable to assign plurality to angel, be­cause, if it were perfect and complete unity, it would be the highest and unlimited power, since power resides in unity. But God alone is unlimited power. 
If it is the characteristic of body to receive and to be acted 5 upon, but characteristic of incorporeal nature to give and to act, then in corporeal nature dwells what we call potency ( the potency the theologians call receptive or passive), and in incorporeal nature act, chat is, che capacity for action. Therefore quality, since it is in a sense incorporeal in itself, has some power to ace, and can be re• fcrred co as act. But because it is received in matter and divided up and thus made in a way corporeal, it is not pure act but rather act contaminated with the passivity of body. So quality is composed of both act and potency. Soul, though it is separable from matter and on account of this called act, and though it has nothing to do with the passivity of body, nonetheless is not yet pure act. For it is moveable. If something is moved, it obtains through movement what beforehand it had lacked. As it was lacking, it has the po• tcncy we call receptive or in a way passive. Bue as it is acting by moving something, ir is acr, and whenever ir obtains something, ic is made acr coo. Soul chen is composed of potency and act. 


Surely angel is not pure act: Noc ar all. Obviously God, be-6 cause He is at che furthest remove from maccer ( wherein exists the passive potency without any power of acting), is understood co be the pure force of acting separated from the nature of receiving or sustaining. IfGod is pure ace, then angel cannot be. For what is one in itself can never become many, except by the addition of a nature alien to it. The nature and definition of pure act itself is unique. Ir is in God, obviously. Ifit were also said to be in angel, we would have to ask whether or not anything exists in angel be­sides act. Ifnothing exists, then only one pure act is left, since the act that is attributed co angel docs not differ from the act ofGod, in chat nothing is present in both besides act and act icself by its very reason is one. But if something besides act is added to angel, then angel is no longer pure act, but has been contaminated by some sort of mixture; and it is not absolute act, but act of a partic­ular sort. In the same way something green or red is not pure light, but light plus some quality of the clements which makes it red or green. Thus angel too is composed of act and potency. 
This is what Plato means in the Pl,ileb11s when he says char God 7 is the limit of all things and is free from the infinite, while all things besides God arc composed of the limit and the infinite. 3 The limit Plato calls act and the infinite, potency (potency, in it­self undetermined, is limited and given form by ace). 
Bue co return to our subject. The potency of angel is in its cs-8 sence, which is in a way brought inro being by God prior to receiv­ing form from Him. For at the first moment of its creation angel only exists. In the next moment it is illumined by its creator so that it becomes intelligent and takes on form. So its essence is in a way formless in the beginning, exposed like a passive substrate ro receive the act of understanding and the ornament of the forms and ideas. Zoroaster puts it like this: "The father perfected all things and presented them to the second mind."4 Angel then is a plurality, since it is composed of many things, a plurality I should add nor subject to movement. \Vith respect to plurality, it is of course inferior to God in that ic is nor a true unity as God is. \Vith respect to mobility, it approaches Him in char it is almost, so co speak, immobile just as God is. 


After God, an unmoving unity, it is correct then to place angel 9 next, an unmoving plurality; and then after angel, soul, which is more distant from God still, since it is a plurality subject to move• ment. It is a plurality because nothing after God can be absolutely simple unity. And it is in some respect subject to movement be· cause the further it recedes from God, the closer it comes to cor• poreal qualities which are totally subject to movement. If it were entirely immobile, it would be angel; if entirely mobile, it would be quality. Yee there has to be a mean between angel and corporeal qualities in order that angel, which is entirely immobile, not be di­rectly juxtaposed co quality, which is entirely mobile. Thus the mean has co be partly immobile and yet partly mobile. Jes sub• seance will be at rest, not changing in size or in any other respect. But its activity will be in flux, and it will do now chis and now chat, and in one way and in another. Bue quality is inferior to soul because it changes in its essence and operation. Body is inferior to quality, for quality is moved itself and moves ocher things, for it moves bodies. Body indeed is moved but moves nothing. 
That it is one something and is ace, angel owes not to itself but 10 to God who is truly one and the purest act. Bue chat it is plural, it owes to itself by way of its power of receiving and being acted upon. Insofar as it has been created ourside God, it fulls short of the perfection of its creator. So plurality is natural co angel. Soul too owes the face char it is a single substance and in essence a sta• ble act not co itself bur to the gift of God, who is the one abso• 
221 
lutely stable acc. Its plurality and passivity ir owes co itself because it is beneath God; its mobility it also owes to itself because it is beneath angel. So just as unity is narural co God and plurality to angel, so motion is natural co soul. 
God's light created angel but under the shadow of God. God's n light created soul bur under the shadow ofangel. From God's sin­gle act angel acquires its stable unity, while under God's shadow it slips into plurality. From God's light soul obtains stability, while under His shadow it has plurality, and under the shadow ofangel, mutability. God is the fount of unity, angel, the fount of plural­ity, soul, the fount of motion. God through Himself is unity, an­gel through God is one but through itself is many. Soul is one through God, many through God's shadow (being rogerher with angel beneath God), and mobile through itself. Quality owes its ability co impel something into motion to what is above it; to itself it owes its capacity for being mixed with matter. Body owes its ability to act to quality; bur co itself alone its capacity co be acted upon. Quality is one degree superior to body in char it moves it, bur one degree inferior to soul in that it is set in motion by soul. Soul is one degree superior to quality in chat it moves itself, bur one degree inferior co angel in chat it is subject to change. Angel is one degree superior co soul in that it is at rest, bur one degree infe­rior to God in that it is many. 
Yet by virtue of chis one aspect alone God surpasses everything 12 to an infinite extent. Zoroaster expresses it like this: "The father enraptured himself; he did nor implant his own special fire in the mind chat follows him."5 Ir is as though he were saying that God cannot be compared with anything else. Body can only be moved by another; it docs nothing of its own narure. Quality both moves another and is moved by another. Soul moves another but is moved by itself. Angel moves ochers (in the sense that it acts on others), and is itself at rest-not at rest through itself but through the divine unity. For, as we said before, what is being at rest other 

than persisting in the unity of one's nature? Angel also moves through God. For whatever all agents do, they do through the power of the prime act. God moves and does all through Himself, and is Himself at rest through Himself. Because all chat are what they arc through another arc brought back to a first something which is whac it is d,rough itself, so all that are both at rest and move others by another we refer back to God who through Him­self is both at rest and moves others. And all that arc moveable by another, such as bodies and qualities, we refer back to soul which is mobile through itself-mobile through itself, I should add, be­cause if you descend from God through angel, it will appear that both God and angel are at rest. The first mobile thing you will come across is soul. Whatever is first of its kind in any genus is such through itself; for instance, the first in the genus of light or heat lights or heats through itself. Thus soul, because it is the first mobile entity among all things chat move, is mobile d,rough itself. An indication of chis is that bodies which lack soul arc only set in motion by some external impulse, while those that have soul move of their own accord and in any direction they wish. Since soul gives bodies che ability to be moved in any direction in a way through themselves, it follows that soul truly is the first to be mo• bile through itself: it is chc first mobile thing. For through its pres• ence an image of its capacity to move on its own appears in body, and from this arises movement in every direction, This proves that soul is the source of movement and chat che uncontrolled turbu­lence of the universe issues from it. This, I think, is the solution to chat Pythagorean riddle appropriated by Xcnocraccs, namely char soul is "self-moving number" -"number" indicating its plural na­
ture, "self-moving·· that its property is to be mutable. 6 
As I have pointed out, we have a number of arguments already 13 co the effect chat an entity of this nature must exist somewhere. First, everything which derives its nature from another can be re­ferred back co something which is what it is through itself. Sec­

ond, since many things exist which arc moved by another, if all were such, then we would either wander on to infinicy, or else go round and round in the same circle. Consequently the first and last mover would be the same, the cause would be the same as the effect, and no order would exist anywhere. Therefore we arc com­pelled to arrive at a mover that is not already moved by another. But the mover which immediately precedes bodies which arc moved by another is not totally immoveable. For then there would be too great a distance between what is moved by another and what is complcrely at rest. l11cir mean is what is mutable through itself. Third, if the closer a thing is to its mover the better it is moved, and if we have to reach the best motion, then somewhere there has to be something in which the essence of the thing moved and of the mover arc identical. Fourth, if something has to be set in motion, then either the mover has to tum towards the thing to be moved, or vice-versa, or both by turns. So let us imagine that in nature there exist only angels, God, and bodies. God and angels, because they arc immutable, will not turn towards bodies; nor bodies towards them, because bodies arc naturally inactive. So no movement will exist at all in nature. l11ercforc there has to be some mutable nature which of its own accord turns towards inac­tive bodies and arouses chem. Always alert, it experiences changes in itself before producing them in body, with the result that, just as corporeal substance is made by spiritual substance, so corporeal movement is produced by spiritual movement. I think Plato real­ised this when he asked in the Laws: "Ifeverything were currently at rest and somewhat later something had to move, what would be the first thing to movc~"7 Obviously it would be what moves easily on its own, as being closest to the power of moving and whose morion is followed by everything else also subject to motion. In the Pl,acdrus Plato calls this the source and principle of motion: "the source" because it has motion from itself, "the principle" be­cause it pours it out into other things.8 

At chis point a doubt arises. If God and angel move something, 14 and soul is subordinate to chem and assuredly roused to action by them, how then is it moved by itself? Lee us answer in chis way. When Apcllcs admired a meadow, he tried to paint a picture ofit with colors.9 All the meadow instantaneously appeared and in• stantaneously excited Apclles' desire {co paint it] . This inscanta• neous appearance and incitement can be called act it is true, since it docs something, but not movement, since it docs not act step by step. For movement is act that traverses moments in time. But the (subsequent] ace of observing and painting which occurs in Apcllcs is called movement because it docs take place gradually. He looks first at one Rower, then at another, and he paints them in the same way. To be sure, it is the meadow char makes Apellcs' soul sec it and yearn co paint it, but it docs this instantaneously. It is Apellcs' soul, not the meadow, that makes him look first at one blade of grass then at another over various moments of time and co depict them in the same gradual way. And it is the nature of his soul not co examine various blades of grass and represent them all at once but to do so gradually. The beginning and end of this movement which consists in seeing and painting is the meadow; for the painter's observation began with the meadow and his desire is directed towards it. But the source by means of which such an act occurs gradually over time and is called movement is the soul of the painter himself. 
According to the Platonists, the rational soul in a kind of per• 15 petual light similarly considers or conjectures about God in a way and angel, and desires to paint itself in their likeness, now in spec• ulation, now in its behavior and activity. Gradually, in forming it• self, it moves itself. This movement properly docs Row our of the soul's own nature as its own fountain of movement defined as ac• tivicy within time; but it is aroused by those above, as by a begin• ning and end outside itself. This stream that flows into the soul from those above is one, constant, instantaneous and eternal; and insofur as it can it produces the same in the soul, namely effects chat arc instantaneous, constant and eternal. That the soul's activi­ties and works, however, occur and change gradually over time is the result ofthe nature proper to the soul being much weaker than chose above. 
Let me give you a single example which will illustrate the whole 16 matter. The Sun gets its light from itself and in an instant pours it into Mercury. Mercury likewise receives all its light in an instant, and remains thereafter always brimful of light. Likewise, che Sun pours the same light in an instant into the Moon, yet the Moon docs not receive it in an instant buc over the course of time. For according as she turns herself cowards the Sun ac one time in one way, at another in another, so she variously receives his light; and because of her very nature she varies with the light's alterna• tion. The Sun represents God, Mercury represents angel, and the Moon, soul. What I say about Mercury take as said likewise about the other scars above the Moon. The angels relate to God as the stars to the Sun. But the soul alone relates to God as the Moon to the Sun. So nothing prevents the soul from descending from the divine and apprehending the divine, and yet fi-om being moved by its own nature and from being able always co be moved and to live. 
: II : 
The soul is the middle level ofbeing. It links and unites all the levels above it and below it when it ascends to the higher and descends to the lower levels. 
So that we may finally reach the desired goal, let us once more as-1 semble things on five levels, placing God and angel at the summit of nature, body and quality at the foot, but soul halfway between 
chose on high and those below. We would do well to call soul the third and middle essence, as the Plaronists do, because it is the mean for all and the third from both directions. If you descend from God, you will find soul at the third level down; or at the third level up, if you ascend from body. We believe that such an essence in nature is an absolute necessity. Because angel, as the Platonists say, truly is (it is always unchanging), whereas quality becomes (it is set in morion at any time), it follows that quality differs totally from angel, both because it is subject to movement and angel is at rest, and because it comes into being at some point and the other always exists. So a mean is needed which shares some characreristics with angel and others with quality. What can char be? Is it that which exists -is i ntemally at rest -for a time or two? No. For such a thing cannot be found. For what remains in• rernally at rest for a time -remains, that is, either because of itself or because of its proximity to rest-also remains forever. There• fore the mean will be char which is forever becoming or being moved. Because it is forever, ir is in harmony with angel, because it is being moved, with quality. Consequently, a third essence must exist as their mean, which can always be in morion and alive, and which can by means of its morion infuse life into bodies. The Plaronisrs were righr in saying char above what exists for a portion of rime is what exists for all time: and above char in turn is what exists eternally; and above char is eternity. But between rhe rhings char are purely eternal and those char arc purely temporal is soul, a bond as it were linking the two. In this respect the most important parts of the world's body arc in a way similar to soul. Some place the sphere of the empyrean, being absolutely motionless, in etcr· nity, but the other spheres simultaneously in eternity and time, and compounded objects finally in rime alone. Similarly, they place pure intellect on the first level of being, ensouled intellects on the second, and corporeal souls on rhe third. 
Bur let us return to our theme. Every work composed of several 
233 

parts is at its most perfect when its members arc so firmly cc• mcnrcd together that it becomes complcccly one, is consistent with and in harmony with itself, and docs not easily break apart. Cor• poreal nature demonscrares this clearly in the blending of the four clements, where earth and fire, which arc far apart, arc linked to• gcthcr by air and water. Even more must we posrubcc such bond­ing of parts in God's universal work, in order for the one God's work to be one too. Now God and body arc chc extremes of na­ture and completely different from each ocher. Angel docs not link chem, for the whole ofangel reaches up towards God and neglects body. For it is with justice char chc most perfect of God's creatures and chat closest to Him should become completely godlike and pass over into God. Nor docs quality connect the two extremes, since ic sinks downwards to body, abandons those above, and, hav• ing abandoned the incorporeal, becomes corporeal. TilUs fur all arc extremes, and the higher and the lower Rec from each other since they lack a proper bond. But the third essence set between chem is such that it deaves to the higher while not abandoning chc lower; and in it, therefore, the higher and the lower arc linked cogcchcr. For it is both immobile and mobile. TI1c former characteristic it shares with the higher, che latter with the lower. If it shares char· actcristics with both, it seeks after both. So by a natural instinct it ascends to the higher and descends to the lower. In ascending, it docs not abandon the things below it; in descending, it does not relinquish the things above ic. For were ic co abandon either, it would swing to the opposite extreme and no longer be the world's true bond. Ir acts in the same way as air, which is an intermediary between fire and water, combining with fire to produce heat and with water to produce humidity. TI1c combination with fire keeps it always hot, with water, damp. In the first case it is rarefied and bright like fire, in the second it becomes sluggish like water. Or rather, it acts like the light of the Sun. Sunlight descends from the Sun into fire and fills the fire without abandoning the Sun. It al­
ways clings to the Sun and it always fills the fire. It mixes with the air yet is not infected by the air's contagion. Similarly, the third es· sence must cling to things divine and fill things mortal. When it dings to things divine, because it is spiritually united with chem and spiritual union begets knowledge, it knows chem. When it fills bodies, moving chem from within, it gives chem life. Thus it is the mirror of things divine, the life of things mortal, the bond joining the two. 
But how is it joined to bodies? Are we co suppose that when it 3 enters a body it is in contact only with a single point ofchat body? Is this what we mean when we say it is united with bodies? Surely not. For it would be united with a point not with a body; nor would it bring life co the whole of the body but only to the point, while the body as a whole would lack life. Or rather, ifit remained concentrated into a single point and thus united co itself, it would be the same as the angel, which is far removed from the body; or at least it would ding to things divine in chis way but abandon bodies. So it is nor attached to one point only of the body, but to many points, and chus fills the body's parts. Bue arc we co suppose chat it fills chem in the way that whiteness fills white flesh, or any other quality wholly fills its own matter? Certainly not. For if chat were so, it would be the same as a quality and, having abandoned things divine, it would completely decline cowards the body. Whiteness is so present in the flesh as a whole char it is extended and divided up equally with the flesh into many parts; and thus, as the physicists tell us, part of whiteness is in part of the flesh: a larger part ofwhiteness in a larger part ofche flesh, a smaller part in a smaller. In this way whiteness has become corporeal. 
The essence we are supposing the third essence would suffer the 4 same fate if it were extended through body in the same way as whiteness. Dragged towards one of the extremes of nature, it would cease to be the link that binds the world together. There• fore when it enters a body, it is present in its entirety in the indi­
• BOOK Ill • CHAPTER II · 
vidU.11 parts ofthe body. It is not divided up or separated into any parts in order to be present in the parts of the body chat arc dis• tanc from each other. For it is through its undivided power, not its quantitative extension, chat it makes contact with the body. Re­maining whole and simple, therefore, it becomes present as an un• divided whole in the individual pares, just as a spoken word and its meaning arc wholly and simultaneously present in a manner in the different parts of a house in that they arc heard and understood almost simultaneously in the different parts. Nor is it impossible for this essence, in spite of being undivided and existing in itself, to be thus present in its entirety throughout the broad mass of a body. Indeed, because it is undivided and not confined in a loca­tion, it can, in its entirety, penetrate or envelop all of whatever is confined in a location. For the extension ofquantity, wherever it is found, docs prevent such (ubiquitous] power and presence, with the result chat some thing extended by way ofquantity cannot be present in its entirety in many things ac once. Moreover, even if that thing is undivided, ir is artachcd somewhere to the quantity of a body, just as the point at the end ofa line is imprinted in the line. The thing cannot be present in its entirety throughout differ­ent parts of the body at che same time. Similarly, a point im­printed somewhere in any radius of a circle is not present in the other radii, nor is it spread along the length of chc whole radius or throughout the circle. But the point which is the center of the cir• de and docs not belong co any particular radius is found in a way in all the radii that arc drawn from the center to the circumfer­ence. And although no point imprinted on the circumference re• gards the whole circle equally, yet the center, which properly is not attached co any circumference, docs regard the whole circle eqll.'.l!ly. So that thing being divided cannot be present in its entirety at che same time in many things, nor can it, even if it is undivided, yet have a fixed position in another divided thing. The third cs• scncc, however, is neither subject to extension -for then it would 
be a quality-nor is ir positioned somewhere in extension-for ir would nor be moved freely of itself if it did not subsist of itself. Ir is like a point rhcn rhat is in itself alive and cocally free from quan­tity and from being in a location. Therefore it encircles the body's every position, and when it enters the body, because ic is not itself a point properly of any one quantity, ir is nor restricted co any par­ticular point of the body's quantity. Since it lies outside the genus of quantity, it is not limited to touching some particular point of quantity, Like the center of a circle, it is in every radius and in the circle as a whole. 
It also follows from chis chat the third essence is simultaneously 5 both divided and undivided: divided, because it spreads its life­bringing shadow through the body's division when it communi­cates itself ro the body's different parrs; undivided, because ir is present ar the same time whole and unmixed. le is divided, I re• peat, because its shadow is in all the body which is divided; but it is undivided, because it exists entire in an undivided way in any pare of che body. Again, it is undivided, because it has a stable and unified subsr:mce; bur it is divided, because in the course ofits op• cration it is divided into many parts when it acts through move• ment and in time. Third, it is undivided, because ir looks up ar things above which arc fully unified; bur it is divided, because it sinks down towards things below which arc utterly divided. Such a nature seems to be completely necessary in the world's order, in or• dcr chat, after God and angel, who cannot be divided according to rime or dimension, but before body and qualities, which arc dis­persed in time and dimension, a harmonious mean may exist, a mean char may be divided in a way by sequential temporal activity but not divided by dimension, and char may neither remain always gathered in a nature of its own like God and angel, nor be scat• 
cered about like body and quality, bur be undivided and divided 
equally. 
This is char essence which Timaeus of Locri and Plato in the 6 
De Mu11clo 10 described as compounded from undivided and divided nature. This is what implants itself in things mortal without itself becoming mortal. For just as it implants itself as a whole and is not split asunder, so it withdraws as a whole and is not dispersed. And because it controls bodies while it also clings to things divine, it is the mistress ofbodies, not their companion. This is the great­est miracle in nature. For the remaining things below God are each individually something singular in themselves, but this es­sence is all things together. It possesses within itself images of things divine on which it depends, and these images are the rea­sons and paradigms of the lower entities which in some sense it produces. Because it is the universal mean, it possesses the powers of all. If this is so, it passes into all. And since it is the true bond of everything in rhc universe, when it passes into some things, it docs not abandon others, bur it moves into individuals while for­ever preserving all things. Ir can with justice, accordingly, be called nature's center, the mean of everything in the universe, the succes­sion or chain of the world, the countenance of all things, and the knot and bond of the world. 
I think I have said enough about the nature of this third cs-scncc. That it is the proper scat of the rational soul, however, we can easily sec from the following definition of the rational soul: "It is life which understands discursively, and gives life to the body in time." These arc precisely the characteristics of the third essence. For it is alive, it understands, and it gives life to the body. It is ob­viously alive, for among terrestrial beings, the ones we describe as alive arc chose that arc moved by an inner power of their own in all directions, up and down, forward and backward, to the right and to the left. That is the way plants and animals arc moved. So where movement exists char is internal and common [ to the whole body], there is life. What I mean by life then is where this internal power of moving exists. This power is to be found pre-eminently in the source, origin and first movement of all activity. For movc­ment is internal and common to the utmost degree where it is the first. Bue first movement is located in chat third essence. So chat is where life is -life of such a sort that bodies come alive and arc moved through participation in it. For life by its very nature is as close as possible to bodies. That third essence then is the life which gives life to bodies. 
It is also intelligent. If morion is perfect anywhere, the most 8 perfect must be where the first morion is. For no perfection what­soever exists in later motions unless ir derives from the first mo­tion. So the morion in the third essence is the most perfect of all motions. But this is the morion that departs as lirtle as possible from its source; that remains very much joined to its foundation; that is single and equal to the greatest possible degree; that is suffi­cient for itself; and chat imitates che most perfect figure. This, as everybody would agree, is the circular morion, which is also the only sempiternal morion among motions. Others reach a limit be­yond which they may not proceed, since nowhere is there infinite space. But circular motion, as it recurs once, so it recurs twice, three rimes, four rimes, and for che same reason; and in the circuit the end and the beginning arc rhe same. Thus when it seems to be finishing, it isjust beginning. Sempiternal circular morion, then, is proper to the third essence insofar as the essence is brought back in a circle to itself through morion. If it is moved from itself, it is also moved to itself, in order for it co make an end of the morion where a beginning exists, seeing char rhe cause itself of morion, in a sense, produces morion for its own sake. So the third essence, scarring from itself, circles perperually back to itself. by unfolding its powers from the highest powers, through the middle and down co the lowest, and likewise by enfolding them again commencing from the lowest, through the middle, and up co rhe highest. If chis is so, it must be aware of itself and what it contains within itself. If ic is aware, it must know. Bue it knows by understanding as long as ic recognizes its essence as spiritual and free from the limica­rions of matter. For it is knowledge of such which is c:tllcd under­standing. We can sec in our own c:isc that knowledge is nothing ocher than spiritu:tl union with some spiritu:tl form. Sight occurs when its spirit is joined co the spiricu:tl image of colors. If the union is to matter, it secs nothing-this is obvious if someone puts a solid body in the line of sight. Our mind too, having been joined by our spiritu:tl power with the incorporeal species and rea­sons of things, understands objects themselves. Similarly, when the third essence, which is spiritual of course, is joined to itself, it knows and understands itself by becoming aware of itself in a spir­itu:tl way. It :tlso understands things divine, ro which it dings :is closely :is possible in a spiricu:tl way. And it understands things corpore:tl, to which by nature it :tlso descends. It knows, I say, by a discursive process over time, since through its activity it is mobile. 

From :ill this we can put together the following definition of the 9 third essence. It is life that of its own nature gives life co bodies. It also knows itself and divine and natural things through discursive rc:isoning. Bur anyone who cannot sec chat this definition is idcn• tical to the definition of rational soul lacks a rational soul. Where­fore the rational soul has its scat in the third essence, and occupies the middle region of nature, and joins all things into one. 


BOOK IV 
: I : 
There are three levels ofrational souls: in the first is the world soul, in the second the souls ofthe spheres, in the third the souls of the living creatures contained within the individual spheres. 
We started by recognizing five levels of being in ascending order. 1 Next, we took chem in descending order and compared them to• gether. Thirdly, we placed rational soul on the middle level. Now we will examine the levels of rational soul in the manner of the theologians who were followers of Hermes Trismegisrus.1 
Generation is the principle of nourishment and growth. For 2 nowhere can anything be nourished or grow without the genera• tion of particular parts. But where nutrition follows generation and growth there we know for certain chat life and soul are pres• enc. But we see the earth generating large numbers oftrees and liv­ing creatures from their own seeds, and nourishing chem and making chem grow. Scones grow too like its ceech, and planes like hairs as long as they are attached by the roots; but as soon as they are pulled up or corn out of the earth, they stop growing. \Vho would say that the womb of chis mother lacks life, when of her own accord she brings forth and nourishes so many offspring, when she sustains itself, and when her back produces teeth and hairs?2 The same holds true of water's body. Therefore water and earth possess soul. 1 unless perhaps someone were to say that che living things, which we claim are made from the soul of earth or of water, since they seem to lack their own seeds, arc not born from 

such a soul, but from the influences of che celestial souls ( of the stars]. 
Platonists, however, will deny chat celestial influences, as partic-3 ular accidents far removed from their own living substances, can generate a living substance here on earth. For accident cannot gen• erate substance, unless it is subject as an instrument co the sub­stance; and I mean to the substance closest to ir.4 For apart from rhe craftsman an instrument is not moved to craft the form of an artifact. Thus an influence descending from celestial life will not generate a vital form ifit is far removed from that life itself. Quite properly. this celestial impulse, because it is common to every ele­ment, is limited in any one element to producing in the element a particular life from the life which is common to the whole cle­ment: it serves it as an instrument. Bue in no way will the celestial impulse itself generate (life]. Since nothing can act above its own level of being, in no way can accident generate substance: it can only dispose matter by a sort ofaccidental preparation. A convinc­ing argument chat this generative life, however, must be present in the elements is chat a substance is needed as agent ro generate sub­stance, and che perfect presence of the agent itself is needed for (such] a perfect action. But when one corporeal substance ap­proaches another in order to act on it in some way, whar is sub­stantial in the agent remains outside [ rhe patient]; what penetrates within is entirely accidental. But penetrating substance (not acci­dent] is needed in order for substance to be made, and perfectly made from it. Such substance is incorporeal and living. 
Natural causes, moreover, because they acr by way of their own 4 nature, are borne towards a definite effect only because of the defi­nite rational principle of their own nature, otherwise they would no more tend cowards one effect than another. Consequenrly co the extent they are fitted to doing a work, they do it; and vice versa. Therefore planes and living things which appear co come co birch in che earth only as a result ofputrefaction muse arise from their own causes no less than things born from propagation. Bur where are these causes of theirs? Undoubtedly the proper causes ofterrestrial lives arc in terrestrial life. For even were you to attrib­ute the causes to celestial souls, the general celestial impulses will nevertheless have to be confineds within particular earthly souls by way of the universal soul of the earth, in order for you to proceed from what is celestial and general to its opposite, what is earthly and particular, by way of an appropriate intermediary, what is earthly and yet general. 
Again, even were you to posit the said proper causes in the con-s lluence of many agents, in the end you would still have co assign one specific determined cause to its proper order; and this cause will order and determine the different causes flowing together from all directions in order co achieve the proper effect. The proper causes, therefore, will be in the soul of the earth, which will produce a vine by means ofthe natural idea or rational principle of the vine, and produce flies through the rational principle of llies.6 It will make them such, I should add, in matter chat has first been made specifically ready by the soul itself, when in order to prepare the matter it contracted the terrestrial impulses in specific ways. Hence, if human art is nothing but an imitation of nature, and this art fashions irs produces by means of their definite rational principles, nature must work in the same way, but with an art which is much more enduring and full of wisdom in that it works with greater effectiveness and makes more beautiful things. But if arc -which produces works that arc not alive and introduces forms that are neither primary nor whole -has living rational principles, there is all the more reason to suppose char rational principles are present in nature, which does generate living things and produce forms that arc primary and whole. For what after all is human artr It is a sort of nature handling matter from the out• side. And what is nature? It is arr molding matter from within, as though rhc carpenter were in the wood. But if human arr, though it is outside the matter, is nevertheless so well attuned and so dose to making the work that it can bring definite works co completion in conformity wich definite ideas, how much more then will the arc of nature be able to achieve this, the art which docs not touch the outer surface of matter with hands or ocher external cools in the way the geometer's soul couches che dust as he traces figures on the ground, bur rather as the geometer's mind fashions imagi­nary matter within? For just as the geometer's mind, when it pon­ders in itself the rational principles of figures, forms the phantasy from within with che figures' images, and through this phantasy forms too che phancastic spirit, and docs so without toil or delib­eration, so in nature's art a certain divine wisdom by way ofthe in­tellectual rational principles fills with natural seeds the life-giving and motive force linked co it; and through this force it forms with utmost case the marrer too from within. 
What is a work of art? The mind of the artist in disjunct mat-cer. What is a work of naturd The mind of nature in conjunct matter. The order of a work of nature, therefore, is more like the order in the art of nature than the order of a human artifact is like the art of man. This is to the degree that matter is closer to nature than to man and nature has greater sway over matter than man does. How then can you hesitate to posit in nature definite ratio­nal principles of definite works? Or rather, just as human arr, which works through contact with matter's surface and fabricates by way of contingent rational principles, produces likewise only contingent forms, so the art of nature, it is evident, because it gives birth to or extracts substantial forms from matter's depths, operates entirely by way of rational principles that arc essential and permanent. A large number of living things, both on earth and in water, are born by putrefaction alone without any corporeal seed. An even larger number come from seeds that have been cjac­ubccd to some distance by an animal and then germinate consid­erably lacer in part with the application of some external warmth, in part without any apparent assistance. All plants and trees, though they arc daily propagated by sowing or planting, yet daily too in many places they arc born spontaneously without seed or corporeal bud (and I omit that many philosophers chink that ani• mals which arc even more perfect arc born from the earth after ex• traordinary floods). Yet certain definite things have to come from certain definite seeds, and what passes from potency into act has to be brought into this act by a cause that already contains such an act within itself, or one that is equivalent or more eminent. Nor should one suppose it enough if the universal and remote cause were merely more eminent, otherwise certain of the most imper• feet causes here with us would be able to produce certain superla­tively perfect effects, (those] in the power of the celestials. 

All these points signify that present everywhere through earth 7 and water in an artful and vital nature arc the spiritual and life­giving seeds of everything. 111csc seeds can generate of themselves wherever bodily seeds arc missing; they can rewarm seeds chat have been left behind by animals; and from one withered grape pip, whose nature is single and lowly, they can bring forth the vine with all its variety, order, and value co man, namely with their var• ied, rational, and splendid powers. 11,c same vital nature draws out from the depths of matter, where corporeal substances do not penetrate, the substantial forms of the clements. Moreover, it rakes the elemental qualities, which ofthemselves can only burn or freeze or whatever, and adds to them the precious variety of colors and shapes and the vigor oflife. 
Moreover, when fire results from the collision of cold bodies 8 where no fire existed before except in potency (and that potency far removed indeed from act), the living nature generates fire through the rational principle of fire which is efficacious in the ex• creme. And wherever accidental qualities alone appear to contrib­ute something to generation, yet arc incapable of doing so them• selves without a substance in accord with the effect, it is that living 

nature char plays the role of the mother substance. It can raise up compound bodies which in themselves are inert and worthless be• cause of their earthy or watery density, and get them to perform certain remarkable actions, even to allure and strengthen men's souls; and this it cannot do without the power of a rational soul. and a very powerful one at chat. For by the power of this wise and enduring nature, which h:1.S been infused in these compound bod­ies, the herb hierobotanum7 (as the Magi tell us) helps doctors to divine che nature of an illness, while agate improves eyesight, dulls the effects of poison, and endows us with strength and eloquence; diamond by its presence deprives a magnet of its power ofattrac­tion; corneli:m stops a flux of blood and mitigates fits of anger; onyx sparks fits of anger and causes nightmares; and coral, accord­ing to Metrodorus and Zoro:1.Ster, removes the terrors of madness and drives away lighming and hail.! Certainly, chis nature presides over our souls and (their] tempestuous emotions and by its power they arc made what they arc. [But] it has to be infused in the low­est and most insignificant bodies too, so that it may raise chem with itself, over and against their own natures, to perform the ac­tions of higher beings. Straro and Chrysippus will acknowledge that such a life permeates the world, but they go on to claim that 
it is the highest God.9 
Platonisrs will deny chis, because above this life which belongs 9 to another and exists in another there h:1.S to be the life chat exists of and in itself. But the life ofany one of the world's spheres is no less close to its sphere than man's rational soul co his body. So the life of a sphere, whether of some part of it or of the whole, is nei, ther chat primary life nor is it God. For God on high is highest unity. According to the Plaronists, it is perhaps possible for some sort of plurality to issue directly from that unity, bur certainly not such a great diversity and discord ofmutually destructive qualities. Again, nothing evil or ugly comes dose at all to the highest good­ness and beauty; but many evil and ugly things occur in the prox:• imity of matter. Furthermore, if God is being itself, He cannot be the form of matter. For such a form is nor being itself but the ra• tional principle of being [namely essence). And because God is be­ing so absolute (if I may put it like chat) that He is not in any par­ticular essence, much less is He in matter. Again, since God is the primary efficient cause, He enacts all His acts first;10 bur rhe form of matter docs not enact all things first. For the compound [as a whole] aces first, nor a part of the compound. Furthermore, the pares of a compound arc in a kind of potency with regard to the act of the whole. But in God there is no potency with regard to a still further act. So God is not made one living being from chat act and from matter, as the followers of Amaury de Bene stupidly suppose.11 A living being char is rational moves of itself; so it can move or not move, and move now faster now slower. Bue such a being will not persist in continuous and regular movement unless by the law of some higber being which is not liable to change at all. So God cannot be the soul of any one sphere, lest a single liv­ing creature be formed from Him and from the sphere and be compelled to have a leader still above it.12 
Bur would we rhcn concede chat the life of the sphere is angel 10 and that natural forms issue from the ideas of angelic mind~ Nor at all. For just as a body is prepared by such or such an essence for such or such a life, so is it necessarily prepared by such a life for such a mind. Thus Plato in his 1imams says that God joined mind to soul and soul to body, u as though lucid mind could only be joined co opaque body by way of transparent soul, just as a bright body is joined to a dense by means ofa diaphanous or transparent body. TI1is is in order that what has light of itself and displays it to others may be joined co what both lacks and blocks light by means of some middle nature, which, though ir may lack light of itself, nonetheless docs not block the entry of light. Bue if the ac• civity of our mind is perfected by a certain separation from matter, then the activity of angelic mind, which is perfect in the genus of inccllccc, is far removed from matter. Bue since angel itself is noth­ing ocher than mind, and since for the very reason it is mind it shuns matter when it aces, in what manner will angel's substance adhere closely to matter~ le is appropriate chat, just as individual human minds make contact with and move their individual bodies by means of their own souls-chat is, their vital forces -so the general minds of the spheres embrace and guide their general bod· ies by means of their souls. For in chis way the spheres will have life implanted in chem, and [yet] rhc divine minds will by no means be cast down from their high estate. Above the lives of the spheres, which arc simultaneously intellectual and animate, will be the angelic lives which are solely intcllccrual. Above chem will be God, the life of lives. Moreover, if angelic mind is indivisible, un• changeable and completely above time and place, there will be no reason either for it to accord with body which is divisible, change• able and subject to time and place, or for it to make such forms in body unless soul intercedes. For soul, because it is indivisible and above place, is formed or guided by angel; but because it is change· able and partly partakes of time, it is compatible with matter. It takes the forms received from on high and leads chem in itself down into changeable and temporal nature through which they 
cross over with greatest case into the body ( which is also change• able); once there, they become divisible in ic. 
It is the view of the Platonists that God formed angels by Him• 11 self, bur souls by means ofangels, and matter by means of souls; and that forms gradually degenerate from the highest life and act, until eventually when they appear in matter they arc no longer re• ally alive or capable of activity. Certainly, in moving from God to angel, forms pass from a single essence into multiple qualities; and from angel to soul, from rest co a productive motion; and from soul to body, from vital and active motion to the passive change· ability of mortal nature. If life is innate in earth and water and ycc chis life is neither God (Iese unlimited act be assigned to the lowli­est potency) nor angel (lest mind in all its clarity be juxtaposed to the most murky of natures), it must be, therefore, that earth and water have souls by whose artincc these [two] spheres arc adorned with the most precious cmbcllishmcnrs. In the same way the little souls of earth and water animals, with the soul of their own sphere to guide them, paint and shape their little bodies most de­lightfully by way of the seeds implanted in them. 
One soul suffices for the earthy sphere, for the sphere is entirely 12 one with all its parts in one continuous mass. One soul too suffices for the sphere of water. Yee the twin souls of the two spheres muse differ from each other in [ their] species. This is evi­dent from the fact that the narurcs of their bodies differ in species, in qualities and in effects. If such spheres, circumscribed though they arc and far removed because of their grossness from the pu· ricy of spirit, are alive with their own souls, then the higher spheres, which arc much purer and more ample and by whose nur• curing earth and water give birth, arc still more alive. Air has its own soul and nrc its for the same reason that earth and water have theirs. Similarly, the eight spheres of the heavens have their eight souls. For such was the number of the heavens according to the ancients. 
Many animals exist on the earth that have their own souls dis· 13 tinct from the common soul of the earth. For they move locally as the earth docs not; they remain alive even when they are not in contact with the earth, which stones and planes ( deriving life as they do from the soul of the earth, not from their own soul) do not do; and they can lift themselves from the earth on high either in Right or in buildings or machines. In water too arc many crea• rurcs living with their own souls. If earth and water have been made prolific and beautiful by God, why may not air and nrc con• tain many souls besides their common souls, and contain their own animals too? Argue the same for the celestial spheres where the stars, since they differ among themselves in quantity, light, power and movement and individually perform their own revolu­tions, have souls chat differ in species too. Now the stars adorn the heavens just as the creatures of earth and water adorn the earth and the water. These celestial animals we sec clearly because ofthe abundance of their lighc. The creatures ofearth and water we also see because chey arc dose co us and with their density they present themselves to our eyes. But the airy and fiery creatures we do not sec, because we do nor sec for char matter the clements of fire and air, given chat they do not appear to earthly eyes even with the aid ofbrightest light, and they have no density of mass. 
The soul of the earth must be rational since certain of earth's 14 animals do not lack reason, and since especially the works of the earth arc more beautiful than men's works. If the soul of chis low• est sphere has not been robbed of reason, the souls of the higher spheres are also not without reason. In earth and water the differ• enc parts are distinguished such chat some of the earthly bodies arc less pure, others arc very pure. The former have irrational souls, the latter rational. The same occurs in water, where irratio• nal fishes live in the muddy parts, but where water daemons (Or­pheus calls chem Ncreids)14 live in certain rarefied water vapors such as those in the cloudy air. TI1eir bodies are sometimes seen by sharper eyes, especially in Persia and Africa, according to Zoro• asccr. 15 Porphyry adds both chat chose daemons in whose bodies fire abounds besides the water's vapor are only seen, and that chis happens in the Ease and South: bur that daemons in bodies where there is a great deal ofearth besides can also be couched. Instances had occurred, he says, in his own day among the Tuscans.16 But in all the spheres higher than water no animals exist char do not pos• 
sess reason, because chose spheres are not divided inco dense parts and rare parts, and whatever exists there is far purer than watery vapors. At this point permit me to exchange a few words with the Pythagoreans. 
Since every large plurality has to be reduced to a small number, 15 
and the small number to a few unities and the few unities ro one unity, the numberless host of souls dwelling in any one of the world's spheres has to be led back to the few most important souls dwelling in chat sphere, let us say to the twelve principal souls. Why chiefly co twelve princes? Because, just as the single body of the world according co che ancients possesses cwelve limbs and each of these contains many joints, so the single soul of the world contains twelve souls and these contain many more. But the cwelve souls contain many more to the extent that first they con• rain twelve principal souls. Why? Because, since che soul of each sphere has been selected from the first group of twelve souls and accommodated to its sphere, it is reasonable that it should have re• course a second time to the number twelve, the mark of which number we have in the first and in the last sphere. In the first sphere across the zodiac we see twelve sidereal animals. In each of these animals shines a principal star, like that animal's heart painted in the sky. The soul of the whole constellation lives life in chat heart. This is where the Pythagoreans, accordingly, locate the twelve divine souls: in Aries' heart, Pallas; in Taurus', Venus; in Gemini's, Phocbus "particular";" in Cancer's, Mercury; in Leo's, Jupiter "particular"; in Virgo's, Ceres; in Libra's, Vulcan; in Scor• pio's, Mars; in Sagittarius', Diana; in Capricorn's, Vesta; in Aquar• ius', Juno; and in Pisces', Neptune.18 Also in the last sphere, earth, there arc the cwclve lives of men. Men live life by way of reason which is assigned to the brain, of irascibility19 which is assigned to the heart, and ofdesire which is attributed to the liver. Ifanyone is alleged to use none of these faculties he will not even be breaching. If someone lives by reason alone, he will no longer be a man. Or rather, it is impossible for a soul joined co a body to proceed by reason alone. A person cannot use the faculty of irascibility alone, because it is always subservient to reason or to desire. He cannot even use desire alone, for desire is always strengthened by cor• 
rupted reason or by irascibility. So a person must proceed by way 
of all, or (at least] of two, of these faculties. The first type of hu­man life employs reason more, irascibility less, desire lease; the sec­ond, reason more, desire less, irascibility least; the third, irascibil­ity more, reason less, desire lease; the fourth, irascibility more, desire less, reason least; the fifth, desire much, reason licde, irasci­bility barely at all; and che sixth, desire much, irascibility little, reason barely. So from the use commonly of the three faculcies emerge six kinds of life. A further six are produced from the use of Uust] two faculcies: in the first, reason rules over irascibility; in the second, the reverse; in the third, reason rules over desire; in the fourth, the reverse; in the fifth, irascibility rules over desire; and in the sixth, the reverse. If the number twelve is seen in the two spheres at either extreme ofthe cosmos, then it will be observed in the intermediate spheres. 
To return co what we commenced a little earlier, in order, there-16 fore, let us bring the host ofsouls living in any one sphere back to the twelve principal souls living in chat same sphere; and again, lee us accept that there arc twelve princes in any one of the twelve spheres, for according to the ancients such is the number of the spheres in the cosmos. Let us refer the twelve princes back to the twelve general souls of those spheres; and in rum refer those twelve souls of che spheres back to che one soul of matter as itself one.20 But since soul participates in mind, and above a participat­ing nature must be a nature chat is complete in itself, so the genus of souls is lifted up to the free [unparcicipating} minds, and these minds finally co the one mind. This one mind, being both one and mind, must be raised co the absolute One, which is not one chis or one chat ( one mind, say, or one soul) buc che One itself, what Py­thagoras calls the universal Apollo. For he interprets Apollo as l,aplou11, meaning "simple," or as a•pol/011, meaning "cut off from che many."21 He calls it tagatho11, the Good itself, because che goodness and perfection of each ching consists in its unity, so that, if good­
ness and unity arc the same in nature, then above nature the prime 
One and the prime Good are the same too. Therefore the prime One and Good rules over the one mind next to it; the one mind rules over the many minds, firstly perchance over rhc twelve lead­ing minds perhaps, then over the twelve groups of twelve minds under them, and then over the multitude of minds and finally over the single world soul. The one world soul rules over the twelve souls of the twelve spheres. These twelve souls rule over chc twelve twelves of souls. The soul of each sphere, in ocher words, rules over chc twelve most important souls in its sphere. Then these twelve rule over numberless souls; for in any sphere the twelve princely souls govern that sphere's ocher souls. Bur chis choir of Muses sings and dances perpetually, as Orpheus says, in musical measures to rhc command of Apollo himself: "It is you who rule and temper the whole heaven with your melodious lyre."22 Bur we have conversed enough with the Pythagoreans. Let us return ro the Platonic order as planned. 
We have provided one argument char the world's spheres arc 17 alive, Let us proceed to another. Since we sec the world's spheres arc moved and we suppose there must be movers of them, and since moreover we know that one sphere cannot be above another or some movers be above others ro infinity, we arc forced to admit char one of the spheres is moved first. If it moves first, we can be sure chat its principle of morion is within. Certainly rhe first thing char is hot or cold is heating or cooling from the heat or cold within, as we indicated above. For we established that what pos· scsses a given property from another must always be referred to what has chc property of itself. But if some of the world's smallest bodies possess in themselves in a way the powers of their own mo• tions and actions -and chis appears in the parts of the clements and in plants and animals -then all the more so do the spheres of the world in all their amplitude possess in rhcmselvcs the princi­ples of rhcir own revolutions. Those principles arc intimately their own, and the spheres are more closely joined to them than our 
bodies arc joined to our souls, since motion is more natural and more efficient to the extent that what is moved is the more closely joined to the mover. But the motion ofthe heavens is more distant from violence than other motions, more natural and more effi­cient. But what then are chose principles? Surely rhey arc not some qualities? Arc we to suppose that just as the parts of the cle­ments seem to be moved by heaviness and lightness and to act through heat and cold, so the world's spheres arc turned round by such qualities? Certainly not. Because quality is limited by its lo­cation and parts and is confined to one particular lump of matter, it acts coo in a limited way and it becomes exhausted. The rcsuk is that it cannot move always or in the same way, and each quality docs one job and aims at one single goal. What does heat do ex• ccpt produce heat, and cold cold? Lightness only lifts things and heaviness drags them down. So quality will never of its own na• ture produce some effect chat is the contrary of its principal ac­tion; never of its own accord return whence it departed; never un· aided depart from the place it has naturally returned co. But heaven is always moved regularly, and produces different and mu­tually contrary effects, and prepares inferior matter for this diver• sity in contrary ways. It assumes various configurations and it has no fixed limit in its circuit; but if you mark a point on the back of heaven, every part of heaven will reach that point an un• limited number of times and depart again with utmost case and not through violence of any kind. For what is violent is neither long-lasting nor always the same and ordered. Furthermore, since heaven revolves with contrary movements at one and the same time, if it were ruled by quality, then it would be moved by con• trary qualities. Bue contrary qualities and natures cannot occur there where there is no strife or destruction. Again, since nature is determined, and thus cannot desire an end which is undetermined and variable like movement, it moves only for rhc sake of rest. Bue circular movement is not in itself directed cowards rest. So it is 
not started by nature, nor, if it comes to rest, is it stopped by na· ture. Furthermore, quality extended in body cannot turn back upon itself, since it is bound to body. So how will quality give heaven the power of revolving on itself when it docs not have in it­self the power of turning back upon itself? Again, since body docs nothing through its own nature but through quality, and quality does not provide chat power to body by its own mocion, bur only to the extent chat it is itself moved by some ocher source, then if some quality moves heaven, it is itself in the meantime being moved by some ocher source. 
What is it that moves it? Is it God? Surely not. For the first 18 cause, since it infinitely exceeds all things, is closely related to no one body, but is equally common to all bodies and yet indepcn· dent of chem all. For if God were the mover of some parcicular body, He would no longer be the mover of all. So as the governor of all, He is not the exclusive governor of some particular body. Yet, as we declared, the spheres need movers who arc as close to them as possible. Bur because the spheres are distinct from each other and moved by different movements, they severally need their own movers, since mover and movement have to be proportionate. The view of those people who distribute movers to the spheres in such a way that they assign God to the first sphere and the other intellects co the remainder is unacceptable.B Since distribution must occur according to proportion, and just as the spheres arc in mutual harmony in their nature and order, so God and che intel­lects will chen be in mutual harmony. God will be superior to the other incellecrs only insofar as the first sphere is superior co the rest, and He will not be measureless. Furthermore, He will be compounded both from a common nature by virtue of which He will be in harmony with the others, and from His own nature by means of which He will be distinguished [from chem]. 
Moreover, if God is goodness itself and this goodness moves 19 
everything as the object of desire moves the appetite, God moves 
heaven as the final cause. But body is not moved extrinsically to• wards an objective unless by some internal form which is desirous of its end and which brings about motion. Therefore present in heaven is a form desirous of the prime goodness and which brings about motion. This yearning is not blind like chat of stones, nor irrational like chat of beasts. For how would a yearning so close to the prime truth and wisdom be blind or irrational, especially since it moves its own body in a more orderly way than our reason moves ours~ So God must not move heaven proximately; rather a form does, which belongs specifically to heaven and which is pos­sessed of life and reason and is desirous of divine goodness. But if anyone were to say the heavens arc moved in a certain harmonious balance, as once the brazen spheres of Archimedes revolved, 2~ he would be forced to admit that chc tempering itself is no less sub­stantial, living and rational than the tempering whereby the limbs ofearthly animals arc moved, inasmuch as it is closer to the prime substance, life and reason, and appears more even in both its na­ture and movements. 
Can heaven's mover be angel then~ Certainly not. For the ccles• 20 rial life itself is the most intimate [mover) of heaven and revolves in a way together with its body. Angel is neither the intimate mover nor is it moved; for above the mobile mover must be an· other mover that is motionless. Angel furthermore is completely at rest. But from what is entirely at rest no sudden or varied motion can arise. If angel is completely at rest, but heaven is moveable by another, they assuredly need some mean chat is mobile through it• self. For next in succession after what is utterly at rest is some• thing that is mobile of itself; and succeeding this is something moveable by another. This is because what is self-moving shares the fact that it is changed with what is changed by another; but that it rules itself, because it remains in its own nature and does not descend from its abode, it shares with what is utterly at rest. What then is it that moveable of itself revolves the heavens next to 
279 ic? Ir is nothing ocher than soul. For soul is both moveable of itself and bestows on bodies the imprint of its movement. Even were we to say chat some remote mover moves the heavens, yet it will not bestow the act of motion on the heavens before it has imparted an inner moving power to chem. 2s Such a power muse not be cocx• tensive with the heavens or else ic would separate from itself, and thus be unable to bestow on heaven the power of perpetually re­turning on itself. So it will be indivisible, yet not, like the point, confined to dimensions, because then it could nor freely rum itself and the dimensions in a circular motion. But it is totally present everywhere in the whole of heaven in order that it may move the whole in the most efficient way. The power, therefore, chat is joined [co heaven] is indivisible [and] everywhere free like the ra­tional soul. Because of its presence, heaven is alive. Its movement 
is life-giving since ic gives life ro all. 
Finally, since in animals chose organs arc alive by means of 21 which souls generate living chings, who will doubt chat heaven is alive, seeing chat a life uses it as an instrument for generating liv­ing things. Isn't movement that is spontaneous, if I may cull the term, a sign of inner life wherever it occurs? This is particularly rrue in the case of natural circular movement. For what is moved more spontaneously than what reverts naturally to itself and turns itself around a natural axis and within a natural periphery? So life is intrinsic to no body more than it is to the world's spheres. Nor should one doubt that one animate being is fashioned out of the spheres and the divine souls. For, since it is proper for matter to receive form, but for form to embrace and rule matter, and since this all occurs more completely there where matter and form alike arc more eminent, who will deny that one indissoluble living being is fashioned our of chc souls that are more eminent than ours, and out of the spheres that arc more simple and lasting than our bod­ies, and that contain, rule and generate our bodies? Aren't chose bodies, because of their marvelous simplicity and tenuity, almost spirirual? They arc more readily animated, therefore, in chc pres­ence of spirits than sulfur flares up in the presence of fire. For the most excellent matter is so closely joined to the most excellent, that is, to the inccllecrual, form that they can never be dissolved. Compound bodies, the further they depart from the discord of cl­cmcncal qualities and the closer they approach to the harmony of the heavenly bodies, the more capable they become of life and of cognition. If this is so, then undoubtedly the most capable of life and of cognition arc the heavenly bodies. The genus of minds is higher than the heavens, and more akin to them than to the earth. Since many minds, therefore, have been joined as forms to earthly bodies, necessarily even more minds, and earlier and more com­pletely, have been joined as forms to heavenly bodies than to earthly bodies. 
Platonists believe, as I have indicated, char not only the heavens 22 but the clements too arc alive. Since they sec all the world's spheres and many compound things which arc linked to them arc moved by an inner movement without anything external impelling them, they conclude that souls arc prcscnc in them. But if some­one were to ask about the ascent and descent of the clements and of compound objects, the Platonists will reply that the :isccnding and descending too is brought about through the soul; through the soul, I say, of their own sphere, which recalls the small parts of its sphere to itself :is a magnet attracts iron. That is also why the motion of a stone falling from on high accelerates the closer it ap­proaches earth, and why the motion of an ascending flame burns more ravenously the closer it approaches heaven. Since the soul of the sphere attracts the more vehemently the closer it is, the world's soul coo attracts for the ~me reason. If people, when they perceive the motion of a piece of iron, were not to sec the magnet, they would suppose that the iron were being moved by itself when it was being attracted by the magnet. Just so do those who do not understand about the souls of the spheres believe that all the litclc 
bodies move of their own accord. Clearly, since no craftsman's mind can move his hands or his cools as deftly as chose little bod­ies arc moved in the world, necessarily chose bodies arc moved and ruled not just by unskillful quality but also by nature's skillfulness. Again, the natural movement of the elements is what does not trespass beyond the bounds of nature and of natural place; in ocher words, ir is an everlasting circular movement in its place and sphere perfectly resembling the sphere's natural shape. Fire and air move in a circle like the Moon, as the revolution of comets shows. Water moves in a circle, ceaselessly flowing back. If earth were moved, as Hegesias claimed,l6 it would be moved in a circle. It stays still, most people believe, on the surf.tee. [But) its parts in a way make a circle around the center of the world insofar as they pack themselves together on all sides around the center continu• ously pressing in. But ascent or descent are not strictly speaking natural morion, bur a sudden restoration by way of a straight line to a natural location and motion, a restoration which, because it is ended by anothcr27 and is always directed along a singular path, dearly shows us that the parts of the elements are not moved of their own accord. For then they would also come to rest of their own accord and would not always follow the same path; and water would be able occasionally not to make the air close to it cold or not pour down in a precipitous cascade. For, although the souls of the spheres always keep the same tenor, yet we must not think chat lirdc souls-the powers, chat is, of the elemental pares, if they arc present in them as motive forces-arc going to preserve such an order, seeing that our own souls cannot preserve it. But the growth of plants and rocks comes from the earth's soul; so they grow only as long as they ding to the earth. The bodies of men and animals live separated from the spheres because they have chcir own souls. This is clear from their shape which is protected by various instruments fundamentally different from the shape of the spheres. le is clear too from their composition thac completely 
285 
differs from the composition of the spheres. Mover relates to mover as object moved to object moved. TI1us soul relates ro soul as body to body. So bodies char arc separated among themselves because of location, nature, shape, quantity and movement must also have a species and soul that arc separate; bodies that are joined, a species and soul that arc joined. 
Yet above individual souls is the one soul of the world. For 23 there has to be one living work of the one living craftsman. le is not one and alive except through one life. Ir docs not have one life unless it has one soul. Since, as the majority argue, one prime marrer in itself unformed lies concealed in all the spheres, it is proper chat its soul be one. What is it chat is responsible for male• ing the limbs of the world, though they arc in opposition to each other, nonetheless work together and variously share their powers, unless it is that one soul tempers the humors, however diverse, of this huge living being, and rakes the spatially separated limbs and the quality oflife and of morion and joins them in concord? How else could the lower parts follow the bidding of the higher, and all the limbs of the world be in sympathy, so to speak, with each other, except by sharing one common narure? One narure comes from one soul. This divine animal should not be any less united than any other animal, seeing that it is che most mighty of all. If among the other animals, therefore, any body whatsoever is gov• emed by a single soul of its own, afortiori the limbs of the world animal are bound into one by a single soul. If this soul's relation• ship to its body is the same as our soul's to our body, then it is present in its entirety in any given part of the world in a way that is no different from our soul's being present in its entirety in any part of our body; otherwise it could nor bind the universe per• fecrly together, or vivify and move it. Soul relates to nature as na• rure to body. So just as a universal nacure exists everywhere in the universal body, so a universal soul exists everywhere in that univer• sal nature. 
• BOOK IV • CHAPTER l •  
TI1at the souls of the spheres arc rational is shown by the fact  24  
that the disposition of the world's movements always tends to•  
wards the better and the more beautiful. For just as the mo­ 
tion which is extremely swift, independent and long-lasting comes  
from the life within, so the astonishing orderliness of that motion  
and its supremely skillful progression come from the art of that  
life, an art of superlative wisdom. For what always guides the  
spheres via the same means to the same end is not a necessity lack­ 
ing life, as it vulgarly appears, but a perfect art and blessed wis­ 
dom, which, since it does not err in its deliberating, as mortals  
customarily do, docs not wander in its motion and activity. Finally,  
another argument for us that heaven is moved by an intelligence is  
that the body of heaven by its motions so orders the clements and  
disposes compound things that inccllccrual souls arc poured into  /  
compound bodies. Now these souls arc far superior to the hcav•  
cnly bodies. So heaven's corporeal nature, since of itself it neither  
does anything nor disposes anything that goes beyond its own spe­ 
cies, in chis doing and disposing, where it assembles perfectly in  
accordance with the species (or idea) of a mind, for a surety is led  
by the divine mind, as a cool is guided by a craftsman. This mind  
is indeed present in heaven's soul, since the soul of the most emi­ 
nent of bodies is the most eminent ofsouls.  
According to the Magi, the world has three chief rulers,  25  
Oromasis, Mirris and Arimanis, that is God, mind and soul.28 To  
God belongs unity, to mind order, and to soul movement. From  
God alone comes the prime unity in the world of the pares and of  
chc whole. From mind by chc power of God comes chc order  
of the united p:ms. From soul by the power of the higher two  
comes the movement of chis ordered creation. Through itself soul  
moves the world in a changeable way, through mind it moves ic in  
an orderly way, and through the eternal unity of God Himself it  
continues forever in this single task. Thus, as I have said, these  
three rulers seem to leave three imprints in the world. Apparently,  
289  


Plato was referring co chis in his letter co King Dionysus29 in a p:issagc I have created at some length in my De "more.10 I will pass over the face chat any natural species has its existence and unity from God, its structure from God through mind, and its perpetu• icy from both; but from soul and he.avcn ch:i.c it is mulciplicd in in• dividual beings and subject co change. For mind and soul, because they arc dircccly created by a cause which is altogether immobile by way of its substance, arc accordingly entirely immutable in sub­stance. Bue the natural species, because chey eman:i.tc from un• changing causes -ch:i.c is, from God and mind-by w:i.y ofc:i.uscs chat move when they ace-char is, by way of che souls and the heavens-arc also mutable in a way in substance, although by the gift of the unchanging causes and through the continuous succcs• sion of individual things they appear co be perpetual. For the mo­bile c:iuses' perpetuity of motion comes from the s:i.me source whence the causes' effects derive the continuous succession of (their] generation. Not only Placonisrs but all che Ariscocclians coo say ch:i.c the he:i.vcnly spheres have souls. Ariscoclc teaches chis in the De cado Book II, in the Physics Books VII and VIII, in che De anima Book II, and in the Metapbysics Book XI,31 as does Ariscode's pupil Theophrasrus in his De ,ado.12 Avicenna and Algazales have fully confirmed it. n Augustine in his Enchiridio11H and Thomas Aquinas in his Co11tra Gentiles Book JPS teach us chat as far as Christian doctrine is concerned it is unimportant whether celcscial bodies do or do not have souls. 
Although it was obviously :i.greed among che Placoniscs that the 26 spheres of the elements were alive, yet the ancient Aristotelians did not discuss the issue. But several more recent thinkers doubt it on the grounds chat the elements appear both co have been created for the sake of chc objects compounded from chem and to be infe­rior co the compounds co the extent ch:ic they arc closer to matter. To chis the Pbtonists will counter chat the spheres of the clements in their entirety were established for the sake of the whole world, 
291 

not for the sake of this or chat compound, but that che particles of the clements, which arc cur off from the entirety of the whole de· menr and arc mingled into chis or that compound body, are min­gled together for the sake of that little body. And although the qualities of their particles may indeed be close to prime matter, yec the clements in their entirety, because they arc counted in the or• dcr of the principal pares ofchc world, arc much closer co the form of the whole world, to the universal model and plan of the highest craftsman, and co the divine influences of the celestial minds and spheres. These influences flow down into chc particles and into the little bodies compounded from them just as they flow through the clements in their entirety. And in chis way the spheres of the cle­ments become receptacles worthy of rational souls. 
In fire and air, moreover, because of their location and the 27 transparency d1ey have in common wid1 the heavens, are particu­lar pares which respond as it were to the constellations directly op­posite chem, and which, ennobled as they are by certain unmcdi­ated influences, arc sufficiently prepared to receive minds. But the grosser parts either of water and canh, or of fire and air diffused in earth, being separated from their proper spheres, do not deserve thinking souls, both because they have foregone the dignity of their spheres, and because they arc not preserving their own sim­plicity and purity owing to the impact of external bodies. But if they arc mixed together with great diligence to the point that they arc able to recover from the long-lasting tempering of qualities a certain uniformity like d1e uniformity of the spheres, then they do result first in certain wonderful activities in compounded bodies, next in life in plants, then in sense, finally in reason. 
But if anyone wants to know the names of the divine souls, he 28 should be aware chat the theology of Orpheus divides the souls of the spheres in such a way that each has a rwin power, one con• cerned with knowing, the other in the sphere's body wich giving life and ruling. So Orpheus calls the one power in the element of earth Pluto, the ocher Proserpina; in water, Oceanus and Thetis, in air, Jupiter Lord of the Lighming Bole and Juno; in fire, Phanes and Aurora; in the soul of the sphere of the Moon, Bacchus Licnices and the Muse Thalia. Again, in the soul of the sphere of Mercury, the one power is Bacchus Silenus, the ocher Euterpe; in that of Venus, (Bacchus} Lysius and Erato; in char of the Sun, (Bacchus] Trietericus [and] Melpomene; in char of Mars, [Bac• chus] B:1SSareus and Clio; in that of Jupiter, {Bacchus] Sabasius and Terpsichore; in that of Saturn, (Bacchus] Amphiecus and Polymnia; and in chat of the eighth sphere, (Bacchus] Pericionius and Urania. But Orpheus calls the first power in the soul of the world Bacchus Eribromus, and the second, the Muse Calliope. Accordingly, in Orpheus' scheme a particular Bacchus rules over the individual Muses, 36 and the powers of the Muses, drunken by the nectar of knowledge divine, arc signified by his name. Thus the nine Muses along with the nine Bacchuses together celebrate their ecstatic rites around the single figure of Apollo, that is, around the splendor of the invisible Sun. But this is enough about the names of the divine souls. 
Let me briefly bring this whole discussion ro an end by com• 29 menting, in the manner of the ancients, chat people are making utter fools of themselves: both chose who declare chat the impure parts of the elements from which anim:als are made do have life and reason, while denying them to the elements themselves in their entirety and purity (as though the part were superior to the whole); and chose who maintain likewise that the world lacks life and sense, although it gives life to plants chat do not spring from seed, and gives sense to animals char are not born from coitus. 
We conclude then char there are three levels ofrational souls: in 30 first place is the single world soul; in second, the twelve souls of the twelve spheres; and in third, the many souls which arc con• rained in the individual spheres. All which pertains to the souls of the spheres and here set forth from the point of view of the 
295 Placoniscs will be confirmed only when a council of Christian theologians, after careful examination, agrees upon chem. 
For Plato too in the Epi110111is, speaking in his own person, 31 makes the following comments concerning the matters under dis• cussion:37 "Jc is impossible for chc earth, the heavens, and all the stars and the masses they comprise, to perform their yearly, monthly, and daily revolutions with such exquisite rationality and to render all things good for us all, unless soul is present near chem or is in them individually."Ja 
: II : The soi,ls ofspheres move the spheres in nccordance with the law offate; they move them in a circle because tl,ey are tlmnselves circles. 
How then do celestial soul.~ move their spheres? According co the 1 Placonists in the same way as your soul moves your body: through desire. The desire in a celestial sphere too is aroused by rcAcction; and reflection there by its soul's fatal law.39 TI1us Plato says in his book, 11,e Statc.sm@, uFace and inborn desire moves the heavens."~0 
He apparently adopted chis view from Zoroaster, from whom cm• anatcs all the wisdom of the ancient theologians. For in speaking of the heavens, he says: "Jc is borne along by the sempiternal will; it is always traversing the works of ncccssicy."41 We will under• stand chis clearly if we consider the order of things in the follow• ing way. 
TI1crc is something said to be above the All and something said 2 to be under the All. What is said to be above the All is God, who cannot properly be the All, because He is the utterly simple unity above number. Under the All arc the particular objects here. Now some mean must exist between what is above the All and what is under the All. But that mean is the All itself. the whole and the accumulated mass of all things. Bue this mean will be a threefold All, or a threefold whole. The first All derives directly from God's unity itself. To the extent that ic can become so, therefore, it must necessarily be united, since it is made most like unity itself. But something can be united in three ways: in essence, in a point in space, in a moment in time: in essence, that it may be a single sub­stance, not compounded from several substances; in a point in space, rhac it may not to be divided inco many parts by virtue of which it would be forcibly splintered into many points in space; in a moment in rime, chat it may find in a twinkling ofan eye what· ever ic can ever possess and not be different in different moments of rime. Hence that All, which comes immediately from God and is most like Him, is united in each of these three ways. This is an• gel, which although insofar as it depends on another it can be said to be mutable in a way, yet because it is created immediately proxi­mate to the infinite immutability of God and is turned cowards God without an intermediary emerges as completely immutable. The second All follows. Because it depends on che One by a sec­ond intention,42 it is already losing one mode of unity. Jc retains the [other) two: it remains one in essence and in a point in space, but it becomes different in the moments of rime. Such is soul. The third All is the matter of the world, which is one in sub­stance, but not only varies in terms of moments, like soul, but is also scattered over different points ofspace. 
In this downward progression why is time found before space? First, because time accompanies any spiritual action, while space is the companion of body, and so time comes closer to spirit and its capacity to ace than space docs; second, because one must descend from unity co multiplicity by stages. Bue as often as a thing's cs• sence is subject to spatial multiplicity, thus often does its activity sustain temporal plurality; but not th<" ocher way about. For cs• sence can excel activity in unity and perfection, but not the con• trary. 
The world's various members arc said co be not the All but un• 4 dcr the All. So angel contains within itself the rational principles of all things, all the principles, I say, in habit and act rogcrhcr. Next, soul contains them all, but in habit not in act. Marter con• rains them all in poten..:y, yec not in habit or act; but by way of succession it sustains all things. Soul itself must really be all things in some manner. Zoroaster says about it: "It holds within the many plenitudes of the world's bosom and folds."° For if it is the mean between the highest and the lowest things, it must contain within itself the gifts and images of those above but the powers and models of those below. But in that part whereby it communi• cates with angelic mind it becomes like angel, in its ocher part un• like. So in their minds the souls of rhe spheres contain all the ideas simultancolL-;ly in habit and in acc. In their lowest powers, those char move bodies, the souls again have all the seeds for gen• crating, bur they have chem rogcchcr in possession and habtt, bur not in acc. TI1c middle pare, char is the reason, follows mind. This is because the bodies ofche spheres' souls, being most perfect and in need of nothing virtually, arc sufficiently ruled by the soul's low• est part alone. So chc middle pare of rhe celestial souls, though mobile by nature, because it lives in leisure from corporeal labor, has been absorbed by mind and becomes stable. 
In our case, however, because of the needs of our body, the 5 middle part is moved too like the lowest part, compelled by the difficult and c:xrremcly laborious cask of looking after the body. According to Plotinus,~~ some movement is apparent in a way even in the rational [middle] part of rhc celestial souls. For since chat pare Aows out from God, from the unity of all, down through its own unity which is its mind's head, and then down through its mind which is the reason's head, it also flows back through its 
mind and its unity up co God, the unity of aJI. Since chis is so, first it naturally desires God Himself, second it understands Him, third it loves Him with an intellectual love, and fourth it attains Him in a union of love. But action which proceeds to a certain end through intermediary stages the Platonists refer to as move• menc, and, if it takes place in time, as temporal movement; but if it occurs in an instant, they call it eternal movement. Such is the movement in the rC3Son of the celestial souls. Although the mid­dle part of these souls, turned back as it is cowards mind, may see all che rational principles at the same rime, yec these souls' lowest pare, being most akin co changeable bodies, does not have suffi• cient power co be able in one ace co be borne into the seeds of all things. Yee ic yearns co be borne into them all in ace, lest all the seeds are in it potentially for naught. Thus it is by way of repeated striving chat it is borne into chem, and in ace it attains now these seeds, now chose; bur it loses earlier seeds in ace when it hurries on to others. So it does not embrace all seeds at the same time, but is always striving for them all. So it is always coursing on• wards. Its course is the first motion. The span of chis course, how• ever, is the first time. The world runs co that course. The times of the world flow to that rime. I believe chis is Proteus himself, as he appears in Orpheus, always changing his shape.45 Bue since the seeds are determined in a fixed number and the soul is always hur• rying onwards, the soul traverses them all in a fixed interval of time. Having done this, it seems to me, it muse either rest, or run back step by seep a second time through chem all, and reweave the same web of generation in the world. This was Zoroaster's view, who believed that when exactly the same causes returned at some point in time, the same effects would similarly recur.46 With this argument he and many others among his successors have upheld the resurrection of human bodies. Bue Placonists have claimed chat to be completed the circuit of the universe cakes an interval of thirty-six thousand solar years, what they designate the Great or 
303 
Cosmic Year.47 Mercury (Trismegistus] calls the ending of this pc· riod "the old age of the world,''49 Plato, in Tiic States111a11, "the res• toration ofthe world."49 
Herc is an example so you can understand more dearly the way 6 heaven moves. Euclid conceives the idea of going by night from Mcgara co Athens in order co hear Socrates, and he takes a lan­tcrn.50 The first thing he docs then is to trace out a general con­ception of the whole journey. But he docs not cake a single step because of this overall plan, unless a particular conception indi­cating the first step intervenes. So the lantern lights up the first step, chc imagination immediately forms a conception of ic, desire chooses it, and the feet take the step. Once taken, the lantern lights up the second seep, and Euclid immediately forms a concep• tion of the step, desires ic, and performs it. Similarly with the third step and so on. The same process, they think, occurs in the soul of a sphere, when its mind and reason decide in general by way of the heaven's motion to trace our as many figures in heaven and forms in matter as it secs ideas and concepts arc fashioned in angel through the power of God Himself This is in order char it may produce, insofar as ic can, a work in this world which is in a way comparable to God's producing an angelic work, and thus im­itate the first artificer. Yet rhc soul of a sphere docs nor scare co move heaven or to do anything, until, like the lantern, its power to move (which is its lowest part) picks our one particular genus of irs seeds from the rest and lights it up so to speak for the eyes. As soon as the force ofa particular genus ofseeds stands out from rhc rest of the seeds, rhc imagination, which is connected co the [soul's) lowest power, forms a conception of the genus, desires it, unfolds ic in heaven, forms it in the clements, sows it in heaven, gives birth to it in the clements. The same process rakes place by way of the order of succession in the other seeds. The fatal law consists in chis, the order of succession, while desire consists in chat, the forming of a conception. Thus "heaven is moved by fate 
and inborn dcsircnsr :umosr in the same way as the spirits and hu­mors in us are shaken and formed by vehement chinking and feel­ing. Nor should you suppose char so many new effects in chc world and so many various figures in heaven arc unfolded in suc• ccssive moments, except by way ofthose [heavenly] souls' new and various affections. For from a cause which is completely stable comes a sc:iblc result. 
We should not suppose that chc soul of the heavens is tired by 7 moving if our soul is not tired. For movers who arc not extended along with the object they move do not customarily tire, that is, if they arc closest to infinite rest, the end of all motions. Further• more, a sublime [heavenly] body is lS fit for motion as the lowest earthly body is unfit. And if:i light breeze can set the dust in mo• tion, and a wind trapped within the bowels of the earth can shake mountains, will you be surprised if sublime souls at the slightest command revolve bodies ofthe utmost thinness~ This is especially since they are moving them around a natural axis and in their own circuit, and by natur:u instinct they incline more to this kind of movement than an earthly body does to descent ( when our soul is leading its body downhill). 
Heaven's body is as equ:uly and easily adapted to :iny position 8 around the ccnterSl as the matter ofthe elements is adapted to any form, or rather, much more so. Just as efficacy in moving is appro· priate co the soul, so a proclivity for motion is appropriate to the body. For body, since it comes into being from act and is in act and is directed towards act, therefore possesses through its forms the nature always co be in :ict. But since it has both substance and di­visible quality, it is compelled ro do or be done to whatever it does or is done to in a divisible way, that is, in a moving way. But the motion of heavenly bodies and its variety contributes to generation and to the diversity of things to be generated. For the motion em­bellishes the heavens with various figures; it transmits the heav­enly powers to the clements more vehemently; it moves the ele­ments and compels them to be mixed together in many ways; and equally it lights and warms their sphere everywhere in an altcrnat• ing pattern. Moreover, the matter of the world cannot possess all the figures in heaven at the same rime, or all the forms under heaven at the same time, since many of chem arc contrary ro each other. Yet everywhere it desires them all as the perfections of its own nature. Hence it is made capable of sempiternal movement, so that it can attain by succession, in a way at least, what it cannot attain by rest. 
But why do the spheres chiefly rotate in a circle? Though I have just indicated che answer, let us go into this more deeply. God is one circle, because He is from Himself like a circle and in Himself insofar as He does not have His beginning or ending outside Himself; bur beginning in Himself, He ends in Himself. Angel is a double circle, because it returns to the point whence it emanated (when it understands and loves its creator), and because it con• templates itself. Soul is a triple circle, because it gazes back at God, because it contemplates itself, and because it descends from the causes of things to their effects, and then ascends from effects to their causes. If these three movers of heaven circle, what is to stop heaven too from being swept up into chis circuit? And since heaven imitates the higher causes in its shape and substance, why shouldn't it do so in movement and activity too? Heaven is subject co soul which is mobile, whence it begins to be moved. Once one part of heaven begins to be moved, because of [its) continuity it pulls another part with it and pushes another, and the related pares necessarily rurn each ocher round in a circle. Heaven cannot stand still, since its soul knows no rest; and yet it does not want to relinquish its natural position. Thus it is made to revolve around the same [point] and in the same [place). Heaven is always in mo• tion, since earth which is as far removed from it as possible is al­ways motionless. What is always in motion necessarily returns co 
che same point. For there is no straight [motion] of bodies [era• 
versing) infinite space.s3 Moreover in The Statesman Plato says: "Rest that is totally with• 10 out change belongs only to the divinest things of all. But the world, because it is body, and already falls short of the dignity of things divine, cannot be completely without change. Because it is the closest possible co things divine, however, it was best for it to be moved in a circular morion, which, since it revolves in the same place, around the same point, according to the same conditions, and continues everlastingly in the same way, it strays as little as it possibly can from resting in a place," Thus Plato.5~ We might add that just as among all che species of morion only motion in a place, because it is as it were external, is not compelled co change the substance and natural quality of its subject, so among motions in a place [only] circular motion, because it alone docs not change place, can be called it would seem a sort of non-morion. Whoever wants heaven co be at rest should, when it cakes his fancy, attach Sacurn's sphere co che [world's) axis. Then one semicircle of the sphere would be above our head, the other above the head of the 
Antipodes. Now since all pares of chis sphere would be mutually completely alike without any difference of nature, there is no rea• son why the one part would be more here than che other part there. Thus the lower semicircle, because it is equally suited to our region here as to the region of the Antipodes, will strive co be here just as it was there; and the upper semicircle, because of the same suitability for the region of the Antipodes, will strive co be there just as it was here. From this striving one pare will push the other, while each part, because of its equal suitability, will want to be equally everywhere. In accual fact the concave or inner surface of the eighth sphere is che natural location of the sphere of Saturn. The convex surface of Saturn is in contact with the concave sur• face of the eighth sphere. Any particle of Saturn's sphere, because ic is equally compatible with any particle of the eighth sphere, 
311 
yearns to come into contact with all the particles of chat sphere. If it remains at rest, individual particles will be in contact with individual particles, but no one particle with chem a.II. Bue by con• tinuing its course it almost attains what it could noc attain by re· maining at rest, such is the longing of chis sphere for the ocher. Furthermore, the soul of the sphere ofSarurn is wholly and simul­taneously present at its sphere's every point. This sphere, desirous of enjoying its soul, so proceeds on its course chat everywhere through all its parts it enjoys the soul entire. Ir wings its way with utmost speed so chat, insofar as it can become so, it is everywhere wholly and simulcancously wherever the soul is wholly and simul­taneously. And because it never finds the soul at rest, it never stops moving itself. Just as the soul revolves continuously around God as its center, so the body which is drawn along by it always revolves around the soul as its center. Bue heaven remains station­ary on the same axis, because [ics) soul, in chat ic participates in mind, also participates in a degree of rest. All rational souls do chis in their bodies. All bodies do chis for [their) souls, whether we arc speaking about the souls of the spheres and constellations or chose of demons and men. Bue if such is less apparent in chis gross body of ours, it happens nonetheless in the soul's aethereal envelope, which we will discuss elsewhere, and which Zoroaster held to be revolving within us concinually.55 
Finally, Ice us conclude chis discussion of the movement of u heaven with chis thought: Neither heaven•s mobile body nor the mover which is moving in order to produce the heaven's motion is che principal leader and end ofchis morion, lest in such motion fa. ciguc and deviation may occur. For the morion is always around a fixed point and directed cowards what is at rest. 


