Therefore, since animal motion docs nor derive from body 7 which is naturally sluggish, nor from the compound alone (in which no power of moving will exist if it is made up of parts in which no power to move exists), then it must derive from soul; and soul, if it gives a living being rhe power of passing over from inactivity to act, must a fortiori give to itself first. For whatever good or viral activity is transmitted from cause ro effect is first un­folded in the cause. Thus heat hears and boils in itself before it heats up another material, and living bodies grow big with seed and conceive foetuses inside themselves before rhcy give birch to offspring. So when rhe soul unfolds within itself the viral progres­sion from porcnriality to act, it is said to be self-moved. Plaronisrs say that movement in the soul is properly action, because it is in its source and because it forms and moves the body; but move­ment in the body they call passion. And since even the corporeal mass of the universe must be moved by something else, they con­clude char the movement of the universal body is a passion and that it is brought about by the movement of the universal soul as by an action. And just as they always reduce the imperfect mem• bers in any genus co the perfect, so they refer the body's imperfect motion ro char of the soul's motion since it is perfect within the genus itself of morion. 
So to the question, What is the principal sort of morion in the 8 soul! the Plaronists respond char it is neither of rhe body, for the soul is incorporeal, nor of the imagination, for the soul has no shape, nor of the understanding, for the soul docs nor know itself; but rather it is movement in accord with its viral essence. For just as the act of essence is to be, and the act of understanding is to understand, so rhc act of life is to live. For the life it possesses comes nor from without but from itself, so char the soul, if I may use the Platoniscs' words, is life generating and producing itself. Bur all life is movement. So if everything living is moved, then what is alive of itself is also moved of itself, and what always lives is always moving, nor in an inrcllecrual way, char is, bur a vital one.46 So soul is and is not always moving, for it is potcncially mind, but actually life. Finally, its essence is always alive and exer­cises unceasing internal movement, because essential life is always in motion. Bue the powers and acts which concern life and inccl­lccc alike can be interrupted or can go astray from time to time. Bue Ice us return now co chc point from which we digressed. 
The following third argument leads us co the same condu-9 sion. All the motions arc these: alteration, generation, corruption, growth, diminution, condensation, rarefaction, and progression. Is che body self-moving with respect co alteration? No! For if it were required to make itself hot, then it would have to possess the heat it gives itself. It would also have co not possess it, if ic were going co accept ir at a particular moment. For someone docs not accept what he possesses. Therefore to heat it is hot already, to be heated it is not yet hoc. To say that it docs and docs not possess some· thing at one and the same time is obviously absurd, unless perhaps someone were co say that water has a sore of coldness potentially which it retains even after it has been heated up by fire, and by means of this potentiality, once it is away from the fire, it actually reverts to the coldness again. To this the Placonisrs will reply that either the water becomes cold from external clements, or if its quality (which somewhat tends cowards an incorporeal nature) ac­tually gushes forth from that internal power which is productive of quality (and which is much closer still co an incorporeal nature), then it follows char chis internal power in rum gushes forth from a substance which is entirely incorporeal. This substance indeed will be the principle of motion in body. Therefore no body is self-mov­ing by alteration. 
Neither docs body generate itself, because what generates 10 something gives being co what is generated. So che parent has the being which it gives co its offspring. What is generated receives from elsewhere rhe being it docs not possess itself. So nothing can give being to itself; for it would have it and not have it at the same time. And since parent precedes offspring, what is with respect to [its] finite nature both the parent and the offspring of itself would be simultaneously before and after itself; and this for something of a finite nature is inconceivable. 
Also, body does not corrupt itself. Since each thing generates u its offspring our ofits own nature, and so brings forth an offspring compatible with and not opposed to itself, it follows that the natu­ral instinct of each thing, which is in a sense the offspring ofits es­sence and being, does not rebel against its essence and being. So nothing is led by its instinct towards non-being, to its own much less but also not to anything else's. Or rather, since each thing's tendency is to preserve itself, it will not be turned around in the opposite direction. 
Body does not increase or diminish itself either. For that can• 12 not come about without alteration, and also a sort of generation and corruption; for we increase and decrease through the alter­ation of qualities. And when we grow, new parts of the body are being generated in us. Vv'hen we shrink, old parts are being corrupted. So if growth and diminution require alteration, gen­eration, and corruption, body which is not self-moving through alteration, generation, and corruption, does not move itself by in• creasing or decreasing. It does not make itself denser or rarer ei• ther, because these too do not occur without alteration. 
Perhaps someone will claim that body of itself at least changes 13 place by going straight or in a circle. But this too is impossible to maintain. For if body is incapable of the aforesaid motions which are internal to it, still more will it be incapable of movements ex­ternal to it. I call moving in a circle or straight ahead external movements, which aim towards ends at a further remove from those which arc the goal of internal motions. And so if body can• not move of itself towards ends proper to itself, how will it be able to move towards ends outside itscln And so lee us now conclude. 
No other movements appear in bodies apart from the eight al· ready mentioned. Bodies arc set in motion by themselves through none of these movements. So bodies arc not moved in any way by themselves. 
Nevertheless, everyone agrees that bodies arc moved by the ac• 14 tion of a naturei7 within, even without external impulses. No Platonist denies that this inner nature is soul. It is possible for soul co move itself, because in it we find certain other motions over and beyond the eight movements of the other nature. With regard to the part that controls body, in soul one finds the tempo· ral interchange of seeds for generating bodily effects emerging in it now this way, now that. Bur with regard to the pare of soul which is concerned with cognition, temporal discursive motion is present in soul when it goes from one cognition and affective disposition to another: temporal ascent via intermediate causes from the na• rurc's furthermost effects to the highest principles, and in turn, temporal descent via intermediate causes from the highest princi• pies co the furthermost effects. TI1cse discursive motions arc par• ricular motions, and chey arc proper co the rational soul's nature, as we have stated earlier. For they arc not firring for God or for an• gels, who possess and see all things simultaneously. Neither arc they appropriate for bodies, which do nothing through themselves, nor co corporeal forms, which are not moved towards incorporeals. But such discursive motions, which lead us towards the divine, lift us beyond the body's nature. Neither body nor anything else is able on its own co rise above its nature. So these revolutions or cy• des which arc alien to bodies but present in soul show that soul can be neither body nor form divided in body; and especially be• cause soul moves in these cycles on its own, that is, through its own nature and power, and is thus self.moving, which body can• not be. 
Moreover, the models of the [eight] corporeal movements ap• 15 pear in soul: ofgeneration when it deaves to the divine, of corrup• 
cion when ic deaves co che mortal, of increase when it remembers, of diminution when it forgets, of alteration when ic passes from one mood co another, of condensation when ic suddenly grasps something or collects itself, of rarefaction when it circles around and is distracted by many things, and ofprogress in a straight line when it first makes contact with things outside. Bue che model of circular movement appears either when, in the world ofobjects, it resolves an effect into its cause and deduces the effect from the cause, or when, in introspection, ic turns to consider itself. Again, soul seems to move in a straiglu line when it sinks down to body and sensation, obliquely when it turns back towards itself or to angel, and in a circle when it turns to God, who is its begin• ning and end. Ir moves itself upwards cowards universals, down• wards cowards particulars, right and left also cowards the opposing differences ofa genus, and forwards and backwards towards naru• ral causes or effects. 
Who would deny chat soul is the source of motions, since in it 16 arc both its own motions and the models of bodily movements, wherein, unlike the nature of body, in a way ic generates itself, or in a way corrupts itself, if I may say so, and makes itself larger or smaller, moves itself from one point, and so on? We should not be surprised then chat it is through the soul's presence that living bodies acquire rhe capacity co change, nourish, and increase them• selves when they generate something out of themselves in them• selves; and again rhe capacity to walk oftheir own accord wherever they sec fit co walk. Things chat do not live do none of these things, which makes it seem char spontaneous movement is rhe special property of life. 
: XIII : 
Tent1, proof: soul does not grow with the growth ofthis body. 
If soul is body, ic will certainly fill chis visible solid body so char 1 the whole of it will live, and it will itself be a slender and active body as the rational soul's speed of movement shows. If you dis• member the body of a living creature, therefore, just as all the body's pieces will be bodies, so all the tiny licde bodies char remain in the amputated limbs will be souls, especially since the soul is all of one nature so it can unite different things. So the arms and legs which have been sundered from the body will live, and move, and experience feeling for a period of time, and the soul char remains in the rest of the body, which often goes on living for ten years or so after chc arms and legs have been amputated, will be much smaller chan before and so will be weak, dull, and forgetful. Lee me add rhe following proof. 
Ifthe soul is a body in all respects equaling in its quantity the 2 magnitude of rhe visible body, then it will grow as rhe body grows and diminish as ir gets smaller. In a huge body the rational soul will be more noble and more divine. When the soul increases as the body increases in the same man, it must be that it is growing by the addition of body like itself. Now is nourishment of chis sore alive in itself before soul ingests ic or nor? If it is not alive, how can char which lacks life give life co che soul and increase it? And before it can borrow the soul's life, it muse borrow life from the soul. Ifit is alive, then it already has soul; in which case we arc ingesting new souls every day co nourish chis our own soul. Now nourishment always changes into che nature of what is being nour• ished. So a large number ofsouls will be destroyed by nature every day in order co preserve one soul. Bue the goodness of nature docs not permit this. Or rather, even our original soul will not be pre• served ifits substance is always slipping away, so that it is forced to perpetually acquire new souls for itself through which it is perpet• ually renewed. 

Why should the new soul be in accord with the previous one? 3 Ifsomething is continually emptying out ofsoul and nourishment being taken in, as we see happening in the case of the flesh, how docs our will remain in most respects always the same, our cus­tomary behavior the same, our opinion and knowledge the same, our memory of the same thing the same? How do we at once rec• ognize a decade lacer rhings we had seen a decade earlier, unless the images of these same things we once received are still preserved intact? Who preserves them unless it is the self-same rational soul that first received andjudged them? How can it preserve them if it is not itself preserved? Ifour rational soul has no stability, how will our images or knowledge retain their stability? 
Nor can anyone say that the rational soul lasts for a long time if 4 it is a body. For what body beneath the heavens can remain in the same state for a long time when rhe heavens themselves are in such rapid motion? Consequently, even if there is such a body char can endure for some while, yet subtle and active bodies will do so least of all. Yet if soul is a body, it muse be of the subtlest kind, so that it may without difficulty permeate the inward parts and give them all life. So bones and muscles will last longer than soul, or rather, flesh will-flesh which decays in a brief while and is renewed ev­ery day. Bur soul will be something like a breath of air, completely unstable and vanishing every instant; in which case it will preserve neither the knowledge nor the images of things for a single day. Soul will also suffer the same fate if it is a quality, or some com­plexion of the humors and limbs. For quality and humor likewise flow away, and, in the course of nutrition, soul will flow in and our again like body. The living being will have no more stability as re• gards its form than it has as regards its own matter; nor will its numberless, living unity be preserved, nor the continuity of the motion of its nutrition or growth. Nor in this living being will there be any power ordering these motions, a power sufficiently stable in itself to impose both an order on their progressing and a limit on their progression ro the point necessary for nourishment and growth. For the controller who gives order and stability ro what is in motion must be stable in himself. 

Someone will perhaps offer the following objection: "In our 5 own body, we see the same outward appearance endures for a long time, even though the flesh perishes and is renewed. Similarly then in the soul what prevents the same images of things known remaining, even though the substance of the soul changes from old to new~" 
Our answer is that the outward appearance docs not remain en• 6 tircly identical or entirely similar; bur that when che flesh departs the earlier appearance disappears too, and a new one similar in a way co the previous one is created in the new flesh. This is brought about by a craftsman of che utmost constancy working from within. Since he always remains the same and retains within himself the rational principles and the seeds for arranging the parts of his own body, he is able co transmit co chc new humors daily streaming past a complexion such as chc previous humors possessed, and co provide the new flesh with an appearance like the old. Ir is as though a face gazing down from above ac a scream were to paint the fresh flow of the ripples ac any moment with new reflections of itself such char the same face apparently stayed there in che changing ripples. Bue this constant inner craftsman of che body is the soul. If it were itself in flux, certainly the body would nor display rhe same traits and features for any length of rime; nor would the soul retain the same items of knowledge, be­cause chcn ir would not retain them by its own power, and nobody else would be present there who could keep the items stable in the rational soul or produce later ones like the earlier ones. 

le is impossible co maintain char, when a soul possessing an im• 7 age ofsomething ebbs away, the same image insinuates itself into a [new) soul Rowing back in. This is because a quality cannot pass from an old subject into a new one; nor does the earlier soul, even as it fades away, fashion another image similar to itself in the arriv• ing soul. For to fashion, since it is action, requires a perfect agent. But that earlier soul, while it is passing away, is itself defective and cannot then bring a new soul co perfection. But the new soul can• not form itself, especially at the moment ofits birth, because it too is imperfect then. So there is no way soul can retain in the mem• ory the images and knowledge of things it once knew, if like body and quality it gradually ebbs and flows away. 

BOOK VII 
: I 
Soul is neither body, nor form divided in body, nor some point ofsuch aform, 
but aform present in its entirety in any ofthe body's parts. '\¼ can see this via its capacityfor sense#perception. First proof: body does not receive images appropriate to sensation. 
In the course of the preceding argument we strayed somehow into 1 the second part ofthis discussion, where we arc going to prove our thesis by turning to the capacity for sense-perception, the sensitive power. So let us pursue this part of the discussion further. 
Whenever body receives something, it receives in a corporeal 2 manner: that is to say, it takes the parts of an object into its own parts and cannot ta.kc on an object larger than itself, just as wax, when it accepts an imprint from a seal, never receives an imprint larger than it can be. Now if the wax possessed a faculty to judge the size of the pattern [ on the seal], it would obviously judge it to be the same size as the imprint it received [in itself]. And it can not take on any other imprint until either it loses the earlier one or it confounds the two in itself such that they arc scarcely distin­guishable from each other. In just the same way soul, if it were body, would receive images of bodies through the eye in a bodily way, such that Plato's image in the eye of Socrates would be no bigger than Socrates' eye. Thus Socrates' soul will chink chat Plato is no bigger than its own eye, or no bigger certainly than the brain into which the image is transferred by rhe eye; or no bigger at any rate than the size ofSocrates' body. For ifSocrates' soul is big, it is not bigger than his body. So if it receives Plato's image in the whole of itself, it will not receive an image larger than it can be it­self. So it will never believe that there is anything larger than Soc­rates' body. Furthermore, when it receives images of Xenophon and Alcibiades and Phaedrus, then it will either lose Plato's image or else have chem all so mixed up thereafter that none of chem is distinguishable from che other. 

One can also argue as follows: soul is either solid or fluid body. 3 If solid, chen it can hardly be given shape by bodies, and its mal­leabilicy disappears as does its acuicy; and once it has assumed one thing's one shape, either it does not take on ocher shapes, or if it does cake them on one afrer another, they all become blurred to­gether. If it is fluid body, then it retains no shapes and has abso­lutely no memory at all. 
Moreover, isn't it well-known chat a thing seems small in a 4 small mirror and larger in a larger one? Similarly, if you look at your face first in the pupil of my eye and chen in a mirror, you will say it is tiny here and big chere,1 for it depends on the largeness or smallness of the mirrors themselves whether bodies are adjudged large or small. Bue the images ofpractically every sort of body arc reflected in the human soul. and it is through these images thac che soul judges how large the bodies are. No body is so huge, so unlimited in size, chat the soul cannot look upon or chink about ic, and there is always another one even larger than che one being thought about. It is obvious from chis chat there is no limit as co size imposed on soul either with respect to what it will be able to grasp or with respect co its looking at the proper substance of soul itself. For if it did have its own size in itself, it would be as big, at the most, as its own body. Hence so many diverse things, so per­spicuous, so immense could not be reflected in so tiny a living mir­ror, given chat normally things appear larger or smaller in propor­tion to chc differing sizes of mirrors. 
Yet we should not suppose that the spiritual images of colors 5 arc either made by bodies or received in mirrors or the brain. They arc nothing but the splendid effects of light striking bodies. But this visible light, although it glitters on bodies, is brought into be­ing and kept in being, nevertheless, by the invisible light of celes­tial souls, which brims over from its limitless abundance and be­comes externally visible; and it is not attached to bodies at all. But it can be joined with the light of our spirit, which comes from our soul. and it can lend it its rays. Moreover, the meanings of words reaching our hearing, which arc also spiritual and arc neither made by body nor attached to body, but are transmitted from one soul co another, come into being and are kept in being through the power of souls. 
Let us briefly conclude the preceding discussion with the fol-6 lowing dilemma. Ifsoul were something corporeal, either che re• flcccions of bodies would make contact with its surface :is in a mir­ror, or their qualities would penetrate deep into the soul's sub­stance as flavors and smells do in water. Ifthe first happened, we might perhaps perceive bodies when they were present, but we would not be able to think about them when they were absent, for we would not retain the reflections. If the second occurred, the senses would gradually and always be confounding each ocher along with the body's passion, and likewise the memory and the qualities; and our judgment would be unable to distinguish chem. 

: II : 
Second proof: the five senses must converge on one center. 
Sight perceives colors but not sounds, hearing only perceives I sounds, smell only odors. The raciona! soul mutually compares color, sound, and odor and concludes chat color is different from sound and so on wich the rest. The power chrough which that soul makes this judgment has knowledge of colors, sounds, and all the ocher things it is comparing together. For how could it say chat color is someching ocher chan sound if it did not have knowledge of boch at once? What then is chis power? Is ic sight? No! For sight does not recognize sounds. Nor is it hearing, which knows noching of colors. Nor is it any one of che five senses at all. For each of chem tells about one ching only and is incapable of com­paring a number of chem togecher. That single power is dearly in­ternal to che soul, to which, as to a hub, various sensations are re­ported by che organs of the five senses which ring it round on every side. It alone sorts out all the objects and activities ofthe five senses.2 
Do not say chat internal co che soul chere arc two or more pow-2 ers through which che soul compares chese objects and activities. For grant the twin powers ifyou will, chen answer me this: \1/hen­ever the soul is going to compare color to sound, docs it appre­hend boch of them, chat is color and sound, by means of each power, or one of chem by means of one power? If either power ap­prehends either, why require twin powers when one is sufficient for the job of comparison and one can do just as much as two? Nature is not lacking in necessary things and not abounding in superfluous. Bue if the soul knows just one of chem [color or sound] by way of one power, via neither power will it compare them together. Yet the soul docs compare them via some power. So there is some other power, besides the twin powers we have just dreamed up, via which the soul compares chose many objects and activities of the senses with each other. 


TI1is power, is it one and indivisible or, like body, divisible into 3 many parts? Is it, for instance, like an indivisible point, which can be called A, or like a line drawn from A to B? If you say it is a line from A to B, the line AB, then I will put these questions to you. As ofrcn as the soul is going to compare color to sound by means ofsuch a line, both of them must touch the line. So is it char color only arrives at the beginning of the line at A and docs not arrive at B? And docs sound only touch B at the end of the line and not pass on to A? Or rather, do both color and sound come to A and B together? If you concede the first -that each reaches only one end of the line-then the two ends of the line will be mutually distinct powers and each will recognize what is its own end but be ignorant of the other. So via neither power will the soul compare color and sound. But if you grant char color and sound reach both A and B together, such d1:1t the power at each end perceives both, then one of the powers is sufficient and rhc ocher useless, for both powers do nothing more than each docs on its own, or rather, the two powers will both be indivisible. 
We arc thus obliged to admit chat the one power in the soul 4 through which the soul judges between many things is indivisible. So char power, being the mistress of rhc senses, is neither body nor quality spread through body. If the soul's power is like rim, what stops the soul itself from being like chat, unless you think perchance that the power ofsome substance is more excellent than its very substance? 


: III : 
Third proof: the more concentrated the sense, the sharper it is. 
Clearly the image of a visible body has to be reduced to some• 1 thing indivisible. This is what happens in the pupils. Otherwise, through such a diminurive pupil we would nor see immensities and the sky itself. Bue if, as far as the eye is concerned, there is no need for greater size in order for it co sec more clearly (indeed, very small eyes sec more acutely than very large eyes -contrast an eagle's eyes with a cow's -it is as though size not only does not help vision but hinders it), if, I say, the outer glance does not need size in order co sec, what shall we say about that inner vision, the common sense, 3 which is superior to and sharper than the individ­ual senses and should in the same measure be more self-sufficient~ It will be more self-sufficient, if it has no need of bodily quantity at all. Finally, the soul's substance itself, che foundation of the senses, will be more self-sufficient than all the senses, if it has no need of quantity. Who would claim that soul needs quanrity's di­mensions, when the body's size docs not in any way improve or impair the soul's gifts? If it improved out of necessity, then a bee would not be smarter than a sheep, a fox more cunning than a pig, a monkey more intelligent than an ass, and a lion braver than a cow. But if it impaired out of necessity, then an elephant would not be more prudent than a horse, a dog more sharp-nosed than a lamb. If body's quantity does not prevail on these powers of the soul which are concerned with the quantity of bodies, then we have co conclude that it prevails still less on that power of che soul which transcends chc quantity of bodies, namely reason, which we will discuss in its proper context. 


• BOOK Vil • CHAPTER IV •  
: IV :  
Fourth proof: ifthe sense is divided,  
then the sensible image in it is divided.  
Lee us accept, if you will, char rhc inner sight is distended by cor•  1  
porcal bulk. Then consider the consequences. When it perceives  
or conceives of the image of an external color, ir docs so in its own  
corporeal way. Such an image is divided through chc different  
pares of this sight, and one part secs just one part of the color.  
There will be nothing in us to comprehend the visible color as a  
whole. Yer a single comprehension ofa single object must be done  
by a single comprehending power. Bue were you to claim that chis  
single power is a form of chc whole compound, a form common to  
all its parts, then we would inquire whether the form is divided (in  
which case the same question recurs) or undivided (in which case  
we will be locating comprehension in an undivided power). So  
sense muse be independent of corporeal size. This is especially the  
case since, if sense were big, it would not be adapted to small ob­ 
jects, nor would the whole sense perceive them bur rather char  
pare of sense which equals the small objects in size. If it were  
small, it would not cake in large objects. And if ic were in between,  
it would not adapt itself to the extremes.  
If you wish to divide sensible color along with dividing the  2  
sense, how will you divide it~ Will you match equal pare co equal  
part~ But you cannot. For the sight is not equal [in size] ro every·  
thing it has co perceive. In how many parts would you divide each~  
Surely nor into a limited number of pares, rhc smallest in the nat•  
ural order~ Ifyou did that, you would not find yourself with a sin•  
glc comprehension of a single object. But I suppose, in the manner  
of the machcmacicians, you arc going ro divide chem into all the  
pares they have. So you will chop both sight and color into an  
223  



infinite number of particles and the individual parts of sight will perceive individual portions of color. Thus there will be innumcra• blc acts of seeing, innumerable colors seen, innumerable sights. A single color will never be able to come into contact with the sight wichouc ac the same time infinite acts of seeing gazing at infinite colors in an infinite manner. This cannot even be imag• ined. Maybe, to avoid these monstrous possibilities, we might sug• gcst that chc whole of the sight secs, not its pares. But chis is equally rash. For how will parts chat lack sense generate a sentient substance? Impossible. So parts that lack sensation cannot consci­cutc the sense itself. 
Shall we say then that the individual parts of sighc do sec, but 3 via the same whole vision of the whole sight; and that they sec the complete form and the pares cogcchcr with the whole? No! Firstly, because the form is not seen but the color itself through the form. Secondly, because an action which results from the assembling of distinct pares also results from the piling up of moments, and it occurs lirclc by little. However, sense perception happens insranca• neously, which means chat the power of perceiving is indivisible. And lastly, if each pare of sight suffices of itself for seeing, why do we need many parrsf If it docs not suffice, then the sentient is coming from the non-sentient, unless perhaps the pares arc asscrn· bled into one by a higher sentient something. Bue char will be a soul rather than the sense. Therefore we shall never escape these witless responses as long as we arc going to insist chat sense is di­visible. So Ice sense be indivisible and Ice the soul be such too, which is the source and the subject of indivisible power. 

: V : 
Fifth proof wherever the s011I perceives it does so as a whole. 
Arc you unaware that a part of some body cannot be equal to the whole of that body, and thus a form, which is such that it extends through the body's different parts, cannot exist as a whole in any one part of the body? Otherwise the part would be equal to the whole. Very well, I admit that; wh:1.t then? The soul as a whole obviously is present in every part of the body because it perceives in its entirety whatever is experienced in any corporeal part how­ever small. If, by some mischance, you injure your foot :1.nd it gives you pain, straighrway your eye rums in that direction, your hand immediately moves towards it, your mouth cries out, and the rest of your members react in much the same way. This dearly would never h:1.ppcn unless the soul. or that aspect of it which is present in all parts of the body, also felt sensation in che foot. Bur it could not fed what happened there if it were absent. For we should nor believe it is the work of some messenger who docs not perceive what he reports, because what he docs not perceive he docs not re• port. Nor can the pain which occurs through chc continuity ofchc mass always occur, just as it cannot be hidden from the soul's other parts, those elsewhere. This is because pain docs nor always occur everywhere, yet the whole soul feels what happens in the particular part of the foot, and it feels it precisely at che spot where the pain occurs. So chc whole soul which simultaneously feels in the individual pares is simult:mcously present in them. Bur what happens to :1. form scattered through the body -whiteness, say-is what also happens to the body, n:1.mcly, what affects one pare docs not necessarily affect all chc ocher pares. For what stops one part of the body and of whiteness becoming stained and dirty while the other pares remain dean? But nothing can happen to any part of a living creature without it soon concerning the whole soul.• 
Our Augustine confirms this mystical Platonic doctrine as fol-2 lows: "The soul is extended through the whole of che body to which it gives life not by spatial diffusion but by a sort of vital in­tensifying. For it is present at the same time in its entirety in all the parts: nor less in the lesser parts or more in the greater ones, but rather more intensely in some parts, less intensely in others, and it is whole in chem all and whole in each one. For it docs not sense in different ways whatever is in the body even if it is not in the whole body: it senses with the whole of itself. When some one thing is touched at a tiny point in its flesh, though chat point not only does not belong co the whole body bur hardly seems in the body, yet the face is not hidden from the whole soul. The sensa• tion does not traverse the whole ofthe body; it is felt only where it occurs. How does it happen char what is nor in the whole body immediately reaches the whole soul? The soul docs nor abandon the rest of the body so as to be wholly in chat one place. For rhe parts where nothing has happened continue to live, thanks to the soul's presence. Bue if sensation occurred in two places simul­taneously, the whole soul would be aware of both."5 Thus Augus· tine. 
Perhaps you will maintain char the soul is spread through the 3 whole body in such a way chat part of it is in the foot, part in the leg, and the remaining parts in the thigh, the breast, the neck, with the most important part in the brain where judgment princi­pally occurs. The reason, you will say, char che pain in the foot is judged by the soul's power residing in the brain is not that the power is also present in the foot, but because one part of the soul brings the news about the foot's pain in a succession to another part and so to the brain. Certainly, you will nor deny that those lower parts of the soul have sensation, since it is clearly in chose parts of the body that the experience is felt. Ifthe foot's feeling has to be announced to the brain it is either because the intermediate bodily parrs undergo the experience one by one, or because, al­though they do not experience anything themselves, they never­theless sense the pain of che foot and transmit ir to the brain. Now dearly che whole body is not always suffering in equal mea• sure, nor is the pain which is in the foot the same in the interme­diate parts, but there is an uncomfortable awareness of chat pain. A discomfort and perception is rims present in all the parts. 
But consider the consequences of chis. TI1e part of the soul 4 which is in the foot feels the foot's pain; che part which is in the leg feels not che foot's pain bur the leg's discomfort. For it feels only where it is and it feels only che sensation that comes to it. Likewise the part in the knee will be aware only of its present sen­sation, and so on with the rest [ of the parts]. At the end of the process the faculry ofjudgment in rhc brain will be aware only of the discomfort present to itself. TI1c parts of chc soul inccrmediarc between the foot and the brain, like chc parts of the body, arc al­most numberless if rhe soul coo is corporeal itself. So the minute che foot strikes :igainst a stone there will not be :i single immediate act of sensation; but a succession of many, indeed almost number• less, pains will occur one after another like numberless percep­tions. Only subsequent to all the [other] p:ircs of the soul-and chis is horribly wrong-will the part in which the principle sensa­tion occurs feel pain. And it will feel not the pain of che foot, but only its own pain. It will never decide where che injury is and where help is needed, nor will the limbs ofthe body be directed by its command to help the foot. 
To :ivoid these absurd consequences, one has to admit rhat the s whole of the judging power of the soul, together with the soul's whole substance, is present in the body's individual parts, so char in its encirery it can immediately perceive without a messenger whatever happens anywhere, and in ics entirety experience it and respond in harmony, issuing immedi:ite orders to direct all che powers of the soul and all the pares of chc body to the task of heal• ing the injured part. And so any aspect of che soul chat is present in any degree in any ofthe body's parts is not absent from any one pare, because in each it moves all co some purpose. Body and form extended through body or through a point of it arc not such that they can be totally and simulcaneously in many things and be ca­pable in their pares of instantaneously and absolutely sharing the same experience and agreeing cogcchcr. So the soul is far different from body and extended form. 

Nor should we be confused by the many animate things whose 6 bodies, when severed, have segments which move and feel as though the soul were as long as chc body, inasmuch as, when the body is cut into bodies, the soul also seems to be cut into souls.6 For rhc soul is nor divided in the first place, but ceases to exist as soon as the structure itself of the body to which it was assigned is destroyed. But new souls arc immediately made by che life of che world in chose segments which arc capable of receiving soul. For their nature is the same as the wholc's. And because the souls in question arc so lowly chat they possess very few powers and opera· cions and therefore need very few instruments, it happens chat even a body nor equipped with different organs is adequate for them. This body would not be adequate for higher souls which on this account do not live in the body's individual pares. Ifyou cut a piece of wood at a certain point, due point, though it is indivisi­ble, ceases to exist, and in its place you can sec two end points emerge, one in each segment. Ifyou break a mirror in which the image of your face is reflected, chc image is not cut in two; first it disappears and then in place of the one image two images arc rec­reated by you in chc two mirrors. If you cake che word "LUCI­FER" where sound plays chc role of body and meaning of soul, and split it into two parts as we did animal, into "LUCI" and "FER," then first the meaning disappears (it signified Venus).7 Yet the meaning is not divided, for the meaning of a name is 

indivisiblc8 as we shall demonstrate elsewhere. Yet rwo separate meanings dwell still in the two parts, and through these meanings as through souls, the two utterances live on: "LUCI" lives on through the meaning "lighr," and "FER" through the meaning "carrying." So what prevents reptiles from having according to the Plaronists an undivided soul although their segmented members live on? 
: VI : 
Sixth proof: in perceiving, the soul is not necessarily passive. 
As true philosophy teaches us, the soul, since it is most pure, is linked to this gross and earthy body, which is so different from it, only by means ofa superlatively fine, transparent, diminutive body which we call the spirit. Ir is generated by the heart's heat out of rhe finest part of the blood and thence spread through rhc whole body. Since it is closely akin to the soul, the soul has no difficulty in entering into chis spirit and first permeates the whole of it, and then with it as a mean it totally permeates the whole body. Ini­tially it gives life and movement to the spirit and makes it vital and then uses ic co control and move the body. Anything from the body that presses inco this spirit the soul immediately perceives since it is present there. This act of perception we call sense. Next the soul takes note of the perception and forms a judgment. This taking notice we call phantasy. What docs all chis lead co? When a surgeon makes an incision in the outer skin ofa body, che Resh is broken and the spirit is weakened and contracted. All this rhe touch feels, the touch being the sense of the universal soul present through all the limbs; and the phanrasy judges and shares in the pain. Now how can the flesh be torn unless che spirit which per­
235 

meaccs it is in pare dissolved with chc dissolving flesh and in pare shrinks into itself in flight? And how can that dissolving and shrinking of the spirit be hidden from its soul? But ifit is not hid­den, why would the soul nor be appalled by rhe destruction of its own work? For the spirit and the body arc the work of the soul. But all things delight in their own work. So pain occurs in the flesh, suffering in the spirit, sensation in the touch, and shar• ing the experience of pain, or condolence I might call ic, in the phanrasy. 
Lee us put the matter in brief. A harmful and destructive pro• 2 cess of dissolving and contracting the substance occurs in both the flesh and the spirit. This we might describe as a dangerous injury. Now docs chis injury pass into che soul too? Certainly not. For then the injury destroys chis substance, and so destroys che sub­stance's power, and so destroys the power's acciviry. Thus in the case of even chc slightest injury to the flesh or the spirit, che sub­stance of the soul present in chem would suffer similar injury; and even more so would its power and operation be injured. Sense and phantasy arc powers of the soul; and co sense and via sensation co form judgments arc these actions of the powers. So if chat gash in the flesh were co become a gash in che soul's substance, then we could neither sense the gash nor form judgments about its nature, its origin, or how to heal it: either the gash would be hidden en­tirely from the soul or it would be perceived as something slight and judged falsely by the soul. Since soul is everywhere in its en• circry, if it suffers in the cut part of the body, then the whole of it will suffer. Bue the same whole soul which is in the cur part is present throughout rhe rest of the body too. So the soul suffers throughout rhe body. If it suffers everywhere, it cannot perceive and announce char the suffering is more in one part of the living being than in another. Moreover, since the suffering and the judg­ment of the suffering arc two different things, and the suffering is 

always judged by the judgment, and if the suffering is present in the judgment, then we need another source ofjudgment to judge the affected judgment. If this too is affected, then again we need another. Eventually, therefore, we must reach a judgment un• affected by suffering. In judging the body's sufferings, if it thence acquires some corporeal quality, then doubtless it suffers. Ifit docs not acquire such a quality, then it is not formed by the body. So the agent of judgment must be such char it accepts from bodies neither their sufferings nor their forms. But the soul could not be such if it were itself a superlatively thin body immersed in this body, or were an affection of this body, or some particular point of 
the affcction.9 
Augustine and Plotinus offer proof of these Platonic doctrines thus. "It seems ro me that the soul when it senses in the body is not affected at all by it. Rather, amidst the body's passions it pur· sues the more attentively its own actions; and whether these ac• rions arc performed easily because they arc appropriate, or with difficulty because less well-suited, they arc not hidden from the soul. And this whole is what is called sensation. But the sense it• self, even when it senses nothing, is still there by way as it were of the corporeal instrument which is moved and tempered by the soul in such a manner that in it the soul is better prepared to deal attentively with the body's passions, to join like with like and to repel what is harmful. In my view, the soul aces on something lu­minous in the eyes, on something serenely airy and quick in the ears, on something misty in the nostrils, on something wet in the mouth, on something earthy and clayey so to speak in our sense of touch. But the soul docs all this in repose if the parts in the living being are bonded in the unity of health in a sort of domestic har• mony. Bur when it encounters those passions which afflict the body with otherness (so to speak), then the soul responds with more attentive actions, chose adapted to its particular places and organs, and then it is said to perceive. In these actions it gladly al­

lies itself with what is congenial and stubbornly resists what is not. I think that when it perceives, the soul causes these actions in the body's passions: it docs not undergo the said passions.'''" When rhc airy spirit of the car is struck by sound, the soul, which was si­lently giving life to the body ofthe cars before ir was struck, now docs so rhe more arrenrivcly; and chis is activity, not passivity. The acting soul is nor unaware of its heightened activity; and nor co be unaware is sensation. So, to sum up, sensation is either the aware• ness of chat heightened activity, or rhc judgment of a bodily pas­sion or quality aroused by that heightened activity ofrhe soul. 
: VII : 
Seventh proof: specific proofs (based on the natural and sensory power ofsoul) that soul is not a divisible form because the work ofquality is undivided. 
Even though che previous arguments have proved not only char 1 soul is nor body, bur also char it is nor a form extended through bodies, yet we believe chis second part of the discussion should be demonstrated by its own proofs. And to enable us co discuss the matter more conveniently, in the Platonic manner we shall call chis extended form, as we have done elsewhere, both a quality and the body's affective disposition [or complex of qualities]. 
If soul were a corporeal quality, it would either be a simple 2 quality, or [the body's] complexion, or the form attached to chem. It cannot be a simple quality, for a simple quality, or the form fol­lowing it, as we have shown elsewhere, does only one thing and does not extend to opposites; bur soul does many and contrary things. Nor will soul be the complexion, or che form following the complexion, because in rhe complexion one quality always domi­nates over the others and its activity flourishes in the body before the others. Soul, however, is tied to no one quality and ro no one 


movement of its own. 
VIII 
Eigl,t1, proof: tJ,e complaion acts t1,roug1, the power ofits qualities. 
TI1e action of a complexion and its form is always performed via 1 the qualities from which it is compounded, and so the complexion never docs anything so sublime without the powers of its qualities extending themselves up to it. The function ofheat is to penetrate and break down. But soul's nutritive power uses heat as an instru­ment not only to break down foods, which is heat's proper role, but also to cook and digest them and to bring them co the form of che living flesh and to the human figure. This action goes well be­yond the power of heat. TI1e growth ofthe living being cannot de­rive from heat as its chief cause. For growth never occurs except through nourishment, and because it is brought to a particular limit of size and to a certain shape. But heat, if bestowed on mat• tcr, spreads out without a fixed limit and with no particular shape to it; and since a work's limit and oucline have to be prescribed by the principal agent, it follows that the principal craftsman of growth cannot be heat; or rather, that no ocher accidental form can do this if heat cannot do it, heat being the most outstanding ofall accidental forms. Yet growth is the result ofsoul. 
We conclude then that soul is not an accidenral form, a fact 2 chat cannot be proved too often. We also conclude that it cannot be made up of accidental forms, for it could not rake qualities which drift around without specific limit, degree, proportion or shape, and order them rationally according to such criteria. We conclude finally that soul is not some substantial form of an cle­ment or ofa compound, for the motion ofsuch a form is towards a single goal, as we said, but growth extends equally to every part. 


: IX 
Ninth proof the comple:xion is an accidentalform. 
The complexion is a particular nature made up of contrary quali-1 
tics in a way, occupying a sort of middle ground between them. le 
follows from chis chat it cannot be a substantial form, because it docs not subsist in itself bur in the body which is subject to those contrary qualities, qualities which do nor tolerate each other, being in mutual conflict. ~thcr, having been received by matter and mingled together, they produce the complexion. This complexion is not a substance, both for the reason I have stated and because it has something opposite co itself, namely the excess of some extra• neous quality which is destructive of its composite nature. Fur• thermorc, the complexion sustains more and less. For its nature, power and activity arc intensified and remitted. But a substance docs not possess a property contrary to itself, since chis opposition ofthings depends on a genus other than char ofsubstance, namely on the genus of quality.11 In its nature a substance is neither intcn• sified more nor remitted less, so that it is now more, now less chis or that substance, because it is a substance once and for all (for ex• ample, more or less chis stone rather than char one). Therefore, since the complexion is not a substance, soul, ifit is a substance, is not the complexion. 
Thar soul is a substance is obvious from the facr char it is 2 through soul chat a living creature is allotted the particular and 


substantial narure and name of a species and a genus. Because of this soul this animal is a dog, because of that soul that animal is a horse, because of another soul that animal is a man. The quality which is accidental comes co its subject only after the subject has already been perfected in its species.12 Bue the soul fashions its own body for itself, protects it once it is made, restores it if it grows weak, and unifies its conflicting clements. When chc soul leaves, the body fades away, and its former complexion or species is not preserved. Such necessarily is the nutritive (vegetative] soul. 
One cannot declare chat the soul which is only nutritive fash-3 ions che body in such a way char, once it is complete, the sensitive soul enters it as an accident. For a body to be suitable for a sensi­tive soul it muse be equipped with the organs of sensing and of moving forward. A nutritive soul as such will produce only the or­gans required for nourishment. Another soul will produce the other organs by means of chose vecy powers whose functioning the organs arc going to serve. There arc not two souls in the same body, one of which will fashion organs for chc other, since the same soul is responsible for both nourishment and sense-percep­tion. Indeed, rhe perturbations of the senses either impede or fur­ther the work of nourishment. For the sadness of the phanrasy en­feebles ic, while gladness scrcngrhens it. Ir is as if there were one soul in man performing both these functions. It is therefore a sub­stance because it is the maker, not a servant, of the body. There­fore it is not the complexion. 


: X : 
Tenth proof the harmony ofthe complexion does not act on the body. 
Nor can we dream with Aristoxcnus and ocher musical theorists 1 
that soul is a kind of harmony born from the complexion.13 For in that case, similarly, soul would be an accidem, not a substance. Surely harmony derives all its force from the lyre? It has no inde• 
pendent existence whatsoever and is incapable of having any effect at all on the strings. Harmony does not move the strings itself, but emerges only when the strings have been set in morion from else• where. So if soul were a harmony of the humors arranged in a par· cicular way, it would be totally dependent on them. It would nor move chem, bur only when they had been set in motion by an• other would it come into being; and it would not rule them, but they would rule and sustain it. So there would be no motions in the body at all besides the conditioning of the humors, no works at all exceeding their command (as indeed there are now, as we de­scribed in detail above). There would be no shape fashioned by an artist's skill, no orderly arrangement. The rational soul would never combat the corporeal emotions, nor return into itself, nor, having severed itself from things corporeal, join with the incorpo• real, nor do something independently if it had no sort of indepen• dent existence. But we have discussed this matter elsewhere and will do so again. 


: XI : 
Eleventh proof there is a harmony in every compound body. 
In every body compounded of multiple parts there is some har-1 mony of the parts through which they exist in mutual accord. So ifsoul were the harmony, all compound bodies would be alive and flourish. You may perhaps claim that soul is indeed a harmony, in che sense of an accord or consonance, bur not any sort of har­mony, just one tempered in a particular and proper way. Now you can see chat the rational principle of soul and of harmony is not the same, because it is not just by dine of being a harmony chat some thing is also a soul. but because it is ordered in a certain way. The harmony docs not derive chis special way of being ordered from its own nature, because then the order would exist in any harmony. So it derives it from elsewhere. From an external princi­ple? Well yes, but chis external principle is not sufficient. For it docs not move and temper the harmony continually and naturally, because it is outside ic. So some greater power lies hidden within the harmony of the humors which tempers the corporeal harmony. It tempers the humors in the bodies of the living in its own way and restores to their bodies a certain harmony which differs from that of other bodies. This proper harmony is the harmony of life, and it is begotten by the life-giving spirit hidden within. 


: XII : 
Twelfth proof: harmony is understood either as the composition itselfofthe bodys parts or as some rational principle ofthe composition. 
¼'hen someone says that soul is harmony, I believe we can under-1 stand it in two ways: harmony either means the composition of humors and parts, or some rational principle underlying the com­position. Certainly soul is not the composition itself, because any part of it would have to be the composition of particular parts of the body, and we are quite unable to specify how this would come about. The body's composition is well known to the natural phi­losophers, but the soul is unknown. And it is difficult to under­stand how soul could be composed from its faculties, the intellect, sense, appetite, and so on. Hardest of all to understand is how the individual faculties could be composed. Moreover, a composition is nothing other than the union of many parts; but the many are not united except by the one -by the one, I say, that is present in the m:my, such that they arc cemented together by some inner bond. So this one power implanted in the parts, from which comes the union of the parts, is the soul rather than the union which proceeds from it. But soul is not even the rational principle of composition itself. Since different rational principles and pro­portions of composition are present in the different parts of the body, the individual parts would possess individual souls: the mouth would have one soul. the muscles another, the Aesh an­other and similarly with the rest, seeing that these pares are com• pounded according to different mutual proportions. But we could never ascribe one life to one living creature, unless we granted it a unique form, a unique mover and ruler: in other words a single soul. 


We see too that the rational principle of harmony is more com• 
2 
patible with the body's qualities than with the soul's. Health, for 
instance, is a harmony of the body's humors, strength a harmony 
of its bones and muscles, beaucy a kind of harmony of its parts 
and colors. But as for sense and intellect, which are simple acts, I 
have no idea what kind of harmonies and of what they could be. 
When we know a thing's substance, we can easily make judgments 
about its accidents. Therefore, because we can easily make judg­
ments about what pertains co health, strength and bcaucy, once 
the proportion of the humors or parts is known, it is obvious that 
these three do in fact consist in the proportion of the humors and 
parts. But because, having found such a proportion, we still do not 
see clearly yet the powers, aces, and habits of the soul, it follows 
that the substance of the soul does not consist in such a propor• 
tion. For who can boast that, having discovered these, he has im• 
mediately discovered the nature of perceiving and understanding? 
Aristotle knows more about the nature of the powers than Hip• 
pocrates; but Hippocrates treats the proportion of the humors 
and parts with greater care. H 
: XIII : 
Thirteenth proof: the harmony of the humors sustains nothing without matter. 
Whatever produces an effect must be superior to that effect. And 1 the more independent it is of matter, the more sublime its status. So the cause must always be more independent of matter than the effect. Thus no effect can be more independent of matter than its cause. The nutritive power [of the soul) is quite independent of matter, and, as I have shown elsewhere, ir does many things above and beyond chc order of the clements. The sensory power is even more independent of matter, because in its act of perceiving ic re• ccives the forms ofthings wichouc their matter. for sight docs nor at the same rime receive the wall's color along with the wall: rather it comes into contact with the color's spiritual image. Understand­ing does the same buc co a far greater extent, as will become appar• enc in whar follows. Therefore, because these powers of the ratio­nal soul arc to a high degree independent of matter, chcy cannot proceed from that cause which is matter or is immersed in matter. 


The humors arc entirely corporeal. So through their particular 2 blend or harmony they cannot produce these powers in any way, much less the soul itself which is their source. Indeed, if soul were to have its substance in the qualities ofthe humors, then it would acquire whatever it perceives through the affections of the humors. But only corporeal forms would be acquired through these affec­tions, since from heat and dryness ir will acquire nor the spiritual image of 6rc but the bodily substance offire; again, from cold and dryness it will get actual earth. And earth too, in receiving as soul receives, will perceive as soul does; and stone will do the same, and so on. 
: XIV: 
Fourteenth proof: the more concordant something is, the more it is a harmony. 
Harmony consists in the concord of many (sounds], so that the 1 more the lyre is in rune, the more the harmony, and the less in rune, the less. Now the soul of a wicked man is by no means in harmony with itself. His sense disagrees with his reason, and his appetites arc at war with each ocher. The soul ofan upright man is everywhere in harmony. If soul were a harmony, the soul of an up• righc man, which is more in rune, would be more of a harmony and therefore more of a soul; and, since soul is a life, so more of a life too. Accordingly the soul of the upright man would be livelier, bolder, and stronger than chat of a thief. The thief's soul would not digest food as a just man's docs, nor beget children, nor sus­tain the different parts of the body, nor sec chem quivering into motion, nor invent as cleverly, nor remember as well, nor speak as eloquently, nor attack as boldly, nor live as long, and so on." 


: xv : 
Fifteenth proof: harmony does not admit anything dissonant. 
To come directly to the point, harmony, so long as it remains har-1 mony, admits no dissonance. If it is harmony, it is not dissonant; if it is dissonant, it is not harmony. And yet don't we sec our soul constantly being pulled in different directions by dissonant opin­ions and emotions, and yet remaining a true and no less active soul~ You cannot retort that rhe discord of the emotions is not al­lowed to destroy the soul. while the discord of the clements and humors docs destroy it. Besides, if the rational soul cannot perish because of its own internal discord, then it cannot perish because ofsome ocher discord. TI1e internal discord proper co che rational human soul is chat proper to each and every rational soul, that is, the discord ofopinions and feelings, which does not affect bodies lacking life but assaults all the souls of mortals. Such a discord docs nor expel these souls from the state of life and sensation. 
Much less then will the discord of the humors, which is further removed from the soul, disrupt the natural condition of the ratio­nal soul which would certainly be destroyed by even the slightest discord of the humors ifit consisted in their concord. So it is per• fectly possible for the parts ofthe rational soul and the body to be in considerable discord and yet for the soul to remain a true living soul. Harmony could not endure this. So anyone who says that soul is a harmony will be wrong. 


BOOK VIII 
: I : 
Soul is individed form, everywhere complete and in no way does it take its origin from matter. It is therefore immortal as its power of understanding demonstrates. First proof rational soul ascends to spirit through fo1ff degrees. 
We shall now embark on the third stage ofour discussion, which 1 demonstrates our proposition through the power of understand­ing, but only if we have first described how our rational soul ac­cording to the Platonists ascends in knowing from body to spirit via four degrees of which understanding is the last.1 
For it ascends by way ofsensation, imagination, phantasy, 2 and 2 understanding. Socrates sees Plato through sensation, when he ac­quires through the eyes an incorporeal image of Plato without Plato's matter, with this proviso however, that the eye does not see Plato except when Plato's body is itself present. Next, even when Plato is absent, Socrates thinks about him through his inner imag­ination: the color and shape which he had seen, the gentle voice he had heard, and everything else he had perceived through the five senses. This imagination rises above matter higher than sensation does, both because in order to think about bodies it does not need their presence, and also because as one faculty it can do whatever all the five senses do. But it is not entirely pure because it can only know what sensation perceives or conceives. Sensation is con­cerned with bodies, imagination with the images of bodies per­ceived or conceived through the senses. 
Shortly thereafter Socrates begins via his phantasy to make 3 the following judgment about the general likeness of Plato chat the imagination had assembled via the five senses: "Who is this man with such a noble body, ample brow, broad shoulders, fair complexion, sparkling eyes, raised eyebrows, aquiline nose, small mouth, and gentle voicd This is Plato, a fine-looking, good man, and a most cherished disciple." You sec how much Socrates' phan­casy excels his imagination. The imagination assembled the image of Plato, but it did not know to whom or co what kind of man the image applied. The phancasy now discerns that it is the image of chis man called Plato, a handsome image of a good man and a friend. So in chis it now possesses, as some suppose, a sense of the substance of beauty, goodness, and friendship. Yet Placoniscs deny chat the phancasy can really know substance, since it has no knowledge of the rational principle of substance. The imagination has no idea at all of the substance of a thing: it secs only its surface and external representation. The phantasy has at least an inkling ofsubstance when itdeclares: "That is a man over there and it is Plato." And it even seems to be dreaming of the incorporeal when it judges Plato co be beautiful, good, a friend, and a disciple. For beauty, goodness, friendship, and the discipline of discipleship1 are all incorporeal, not evident to the senses or the imagination. These particular concepts of the phantasy are called as it were the bodi­less intentions of bodies.4 
Even so, the rational soul has not yet completely soared beyond 4 matter, first because the phantasy does not realize that these inten­tions are incorporeal, and next because Socrates' phantasy is effec­tively seeing this one man, Plato, in this place and situation, at this time, and at this hour of the day. It is seeing this beauty, this goodness, and the rest likewise when in itself it pictures Plato un­der the same conditions as he exists in matter. But while the phantasy roves around the particular conditions of a specific per­son, the intellect conceives of the common rational principles, and both faculties arc doing their work at the same time. The under• standing reasons like this: Antisthenes is more or less che same sore of man as Placo, and so is Xenophon: chey are similar in ap• pearance, equally beautiful and good, friends and disciples in che same way. So in all chree chere exists one common humanity via which they are all equally men, and one nature of beauty and one of goodness via which chey are all equally beautiful and equally good. The humanity which is common co them is also common co innumerable other people who exisc or have existed or will exisc in whatever che rime or place of cheir birch. Similarly with beauty and the rest; and assume that whac I say about humanity I have said about chem coo. So if humanity communicates itself equally to all individual people, in every place and time, ic is not attached to any one person, in one place or ac one time. This common na­ture seems to transcend bodies' individual conditions. So in itself it must be in a way incorporeal. [But] because it pours itself into individual bodies and hence is in another and in many things, then above this which is in another, there has to be that which remains in itself; and above che one which is in the many, there has to be che one which stands firm in itself. 
It follows accordingly that above all bodies exists some rational principle or idea of humanity itself, by whose particular participa· tion or likeness all who are men are made men. And chis is be­cause the nature which is common to all individuals neither occurs by chance, since it is always and similarly ordered, nor does it sub• sist through itself, since it cannot subsist on its own but needs matter as a basis. Therefore it is made by a cause. But it is made neither by matter, which does not form itself, nor by one single person, who cannot act on all the others and does what he does on his own and not in common with the rest. Nor is it made by all the individuals collectively, who, insofar as they differ among themselves, do nothing in common but rather different things; and insofar as they agree, they agree in this nature, or rather they exist because of ic, for being simpler than they are, it is to chat ex­tent prior co chem. The various different properties for constituc~ ing individual people are added co chis nature as co something prior co chem. Yer ic comes from a single form inasmuch ic is one; and chis form muse be above che multitude of individual people, otherwise ic coo would come from another form, and another again from another ad infinitum. 

In chis way we ascend to che divine idea, which must be above 6 all individuals in order for it co ace on chem all alike and co recon• cile chem by means of a common nature. If we have to ascend from che part which is below che whole up to che whole, and thence co whac is above che whole, it seems reasonable chac we should ascend from individual people, who exist in pares of space and time, up co che intrinsic nature they share, which exists as ic were throughout space and through all of time; and then up from chat nature co fies) rational principle, which exists above all space and time and which Plato calls an idea. s Ac chis point che incellecc receives che divine idea itself, which either exists on ics own or in che divine light. For reason dictates chat all the natural species, be­ing eternal, cannot come from a mobile cause; otherwise, being produces of movement, they would at some point cease to exist. Yee they are produces, for they are pares of the universe which has been assembled from elsewhere; and they all come from a single cause, being mutually so arranged char in a single nature chey con­tribute co a single product and end. Hence the human incdlecc concludes chat above chis world of movement species exist in che unmoving mind, the source of the world's movement, species which are the paradigms of the natural species and which do noc exist in the corporeal or animal nature (for they would be mobile), but in the incelleccual, or rather I should say, the intelligible na­cure; for incelligibles muse be located together in the highest intel­ligible thing. 


• BOOK VIII • CHAPTER I · 
However, a process of argument like chis is not necessary for 7 the intellect to reach the rational principles common co all. Or rather, just as the phamasy is naturally able to make judgments separately about objects, so che intellect has a natural power which enables it co proceed instancly and without a process of argument, just as soon as the particular image of Placo has been picrured in the phancasy-co proceed inscancly, I say, having rid itself of the notion of chis particular individual, to ponder both the narure and the idea chat are common to all men. When chis beauty or chis goodness are pictured, it immediately ponders the universal nature and rational principle both of beauty and of goodness, a principle nor located in any particular matter, place, or time, but either present in all matter, or independent of matter and subsisting ab­solutely on its own. So sense is concerned with bodies, imagina• tion wtch the images ofbodies, phantasy with the individual inten• tions of che images, and intellect with the common natures and entirely incorporeal rational principles of the individual intentions. 
One must remember chat the intellect has knowledge not only 8 of the universal nature but of the particular as well; otherwise it would not be able to make comparisons between them or co know all the faculties inferior co itself and their functions when it com• pares chem all to itself. However, almost all would agree chat the universal nature is known to the intellect before the particular na­ture, since it aces in the first instance by virtue of che nature of the intelligible form {or species]. But the incelligibile form, since it is conceived by a process ofabstraction, has been abstracted or freed and hence refers primarily ro the universal nature: ir acquires chis power (co be freed] indeed from the power of the intellect in which and from which it exists, as though the intellect itself were free. But from the image which is in the phantasy, only the partic­ular is represented. Both the Platonists and the Aristotelians think for the most part chat chis particular is seen by the incellecc only in a second and reflective act. This is to the extent chat the intellect, after it has suddenly and directly seen the universal through the species, then returns in a discursive process through the act and species back to the image (by the prompting of which the species had been conceived) and now sees the particular. Thus movement towards things incorporeal and immaterial is che mosc natural co the mind in that it turns to them primarily, immediately, and di­rectly. And from chis it is clear that the faculty of understanding is entirely incorporeal. 

If then we have demonstrated that soul is noc divided in body 9 by way of the works of nutrition and sense-perception, the first of which occur in the body and the second via the body and with re• gard to bodies, how much more should we suppose that the same is obvious for the works of understanding; and suppose further­more that the soul does not originate from matter and is not sub­ject co death, insofar as ic performs on its own the work of under• standing wherein ic takes leave of matter completely and rises to the rational principles which arc incorporc:tl and eternal? Come then, lee us see, by way ofthe works and affects of the understand­ing, how we might be able to find what we are seeking. 
: II : 
Second proof: soul is nourished by truth. 
The reason for caking nourishment is so chat it may change into 1 the substance of what is being nourished, just as bread is eaten so that ic may become flesh. Food must be closely akin therefore co whac is being nourished, so chat it can easily cross over into its na­ture. That is why aquatic creatures feed on watery foods, terres­trial on earthy foods, and aerial on airy foods. So coo bodies are nourished by corporeal foods and incorporeal entities by incorpo• real. For body does not cross over into spirit, nor spirit into body, since no common material underlies them through which and in which they would be joined to each other. le is generally agreed that the soul is not nourished by bodies but by things incorporeal; it must be accepted then that the soul is incorporeal. 
If the soul did feed on any corporeal foods, it would most likely 2 be on the same foods as its body does. For since that body is most closely suited to the soul, its foods would be the most suitable among corporeal foods, provided of course that the foods were so refined and purified as to make them suitable for the rarified little body the soul is popularly supposed to be. So the soul in a fat body would be stronger and cleverer at finding out than that in a thin body: its memory would be more reliable, it would be quicker to act, and it would exercise greater control in conquering the evil lusts of the body. A large body would possess magnanimity, a riny one pusillanimity. And the rational soul would develop as the body grew, even if it did not learn anything or train itself by study­ing anything ac all; and as the body declined with age and its facul­ties grew weaker, the soul would lose its wisdom, its judgment, and its self-possession. After feasting and wine, its wits would be sharper and more elevated. 
This is what would happen ifthe rational soul were to flourish 3 on corporeal foods. Bue what actually happens is the opposite. Therefore the rational soul does not feed on corporeal foods. On what then? On nothing~ It would be eternal if it had no need of food at all; and that is what we most desire. But perhaps it feeds on banquets ofthe spirit? Indeed, it never feeds on anything else, as the wise man, who has so often taken such nourishment, knows full well. 
Nor should we assent to the Epicureans' view that the soul 4 
grows with the body because its powers are stronger in older chil­
dren than in infants, and that young men and grown men simi• 
larly daily excel in the use of these powers until they start to grow 

weaker as the body ages.6 For the relationship of the soul to the limbs of the body is that ofan art to the instruments it uses. But often the art, while remaining the same or similar, moves the in­struments now with more ease, now with more difficulty, since some are more apt for morion, others less so. So although the strength in the soul may always be the same, yet because of exces­sive softness or dryness the limbs are not equally strong or agile. And this strength, which seems to be in the body, comes not so much from the weight of the flesh as from the natural proportions and artful fashioning of the limbs, both of which pertain more co spirit than to corporeal bulk. 7 So too the strength present in the soul is acquired not from bodily growth, as is obvious in the case ofchose who wallow in idleness in whom bodily growth in no way profits the rational soul; but rather it is procured from the soul's industry, natural ability, practice, and disposition. But who will deny that the body's powers are acquired over time? Often, how• ever, the soul displays courage in a twinkling, when either reason points the way and commands an heroic deed or "fury provides rhe weapons."8 Often it is the puny man who overcomes the mightier: though he does not grow in body, he often grows in strength of mind. Or rather, as our bodily strength wanes, often we wax in soul. The rational soul most usually acquires knowledge or magnanimity instantly, but the body can neither give anything nor receive it except over time. 
Finally, the power or virtue of the rational soul, according to 5 the teaching of the Magi, is a sort ofsymmetry through which the soul keeps in tune both with itself and with the true and the good. If in some way a quadrangular line is made circular, it becomes more perfect, not as it becomes longer, but as it becomes squarer. If you tune a lyre, it would be more perfect not because it is bigger but because it is more harmonious. So too when a young man in• creases in virtue, his soul is not increasing in quantity bur acquir• ing a certain spiricual symmetry and harmony. 

Let no one raise the objection that when the body is neither 
6 
surfeited with the weight of overeating nor languishing with hun• ger, but is being fed in moderation, then che rational soul is simi• larly nourished and in that condition waxes stronger, but other­wise the reverse. Now it is in fuct true that the rational soul is at its strongest when a man is in the state of moderation. Yet this does not derive from its being nourished in the same way as the body, but because the soul naturally governs the body; and when the body is sick or ailing, the soul is so preoccupied with looking after it and keeping it in order that it cannot concentrate on the search for truth. However, when the body is at peace, the mind can let its thoughts range without hindrance, and it is then that it most feeds on its proper foods. 
But what shall we call the soul's food other than that for 7 which it always hungers and thirsts, something that when pro• cured brings it utmost joy and when consumed gives it increase and plenitude? Every rational soul at every age unceasingly desires truth before all else. This is what artisans and artists seek, what• ever their art; and even little children never stop asking questions, wanting to know the truth about every single thing. And it is not just once or twice or three times a day, as with the body's food, that they seek the truth, but at every single instant, whatever they are doing. Hence we often neglect the nourishment ofthe body in our eagerness to acquire the truth, while we spare neither time, money, nor effort in its study. We weaken our body, and with it weakened, our rational soul becomes stronger.9 The soul seeks this truth, not the body. For truth docs not increase the body: rather its pursuit most often harms the body. And the soul desires it for itself, not for the body. For what can truth contribute to the body? Whenever truth seems to benefit the body, the ensuing benefit is not because of the truth but because of some bodily advantage which happens when the truth is known. Indeed, the soul avidly hunts for the truth even when no practical advantage results; and 

with the body full ofits food, che soul still hungers and thirsts for truth. When truth is found it rejoices, not just for a period of time, as with bodily activities, but with a joy that lases for ever: it is filled with light, it waxes in strength, it becomes so magnificent that in the presence of its ( new J greatness the things which seemed so important when it was a poor, starving, little soul seem unimportant to it now. On such a diet it becomes incorruptible, tempered, and just, the captain and master of men, more exalted than the heavens, equal to the angels, like unto God. 
Who then can doubt any longer that truth is the natural food 8 of the human mind~ All minds desire che same food, and each mind desires it all the time. This unchanging consensus of desire shows that minds harmonize co a wonderful degree, and chat each mind remains firm in its nature insofar as the desire of minds does not vary and change like the appetite of the senses, which is as var­ied as the diversity of bodies and changes when the body changes. One could say that the senses follow the changeability of bodies, whereas che mind follows the unchanging nature of things divine. For the mind shuns the body's food and dines on the same fare as the heavenly and eternal minds. This fare is the truth. 
Truth is not corporeal, however, for then it would not be pres-9 enc in incorporeal entities. But it is present in God, in angels, and in numbers, which arc both incorporeal and true. And since incor­poreal entities, to the degree chat they are more pure and long• lasting than bodies, are accordingly more true, it follows that the truth dwells in chem rather than in bodies. More importantly, there is no truth strictly speaking in bodies. For bodies contain two things, matter and form. There is no truth in matter, for nothing is truly in any particular species because of matter: a man is not truly anything because of matter, neither is a horse, nor the rest. Nor does truth reside in the body's form, for the form whose power is corrupted in matter is not the true form. 

One could take the evidence of mathematicians who cannot 10 find true figures in bodies. A true circle set on a true plane re• valves perpetually; and reason requires this to happen because this circle couches the plane at a point. Yet a body cannot come to rest in a point. No one has ever seen these figures in bodies. So no true figures exist in bodies, perhaps because they do not have the figures' true principles -in regards at lease co the sense-such as points, lines, and surfaces. Reason demonstrates that the true point must be without length, the true line without breadth, the true surface without depth. But nowhere in matter are such things discovered by the sense. Thus, since truth is somewhere, but it is not in bodies or the sense, it is doubtless among spirits and there• fore incorporeal. 
This is clear too from the fact that truth exists principally 11 where there is knowledge. The true concern of knowledge is with the universal rational principles ofthings, as when someone would know what goodness itself is, what justice, the principles that arc common to particular good or just actions or offices, and so on. Such rational principles arc incorporeal, since they arc not con• rained within any particular body but arc common to many. The principle of a body or a circle is just as wholly present in the small· est body or circle as in the largest; the principle of length or breadth or depth as wholly present in the smallest line, surface, or elevation as in the largest. And the rational principle of quantity itself is totally applicable to the total quantity of any given thing. Thus the principles of body, figure, dimension, and even quantity arc not corporeal nor do they possess extension; much less can ocher principles be corporeal or extended. 
Again, the universal rational principles arc unchangeable, for 12 they cannot be other than they arc. But all corporcals arc change• able. Knowledge, because it deals with such principles, is therefore incorporeal; therefore truth is incorporeal coo. Consequently judg­ments about the truth of things -what it is, how it comes about 
283 

and is discovered, what is close to it or fur from it-arc made nor by any of the senses bur by reason alone, and particularly when it removes itself from the illusions of the senses and of bodies. So truth is incorporeal. And especially so is the truth and knowledge of things divine which gives the soul special delight and nourish­ment. So how can soul be corporeal when it rejects bodily food and feeds on the spiritual, and seeing chat it draws delight, nour­ishment, and increase from all truth and especially from the truth of things divine? And how can it be mortal, if it feeds on immor­tal truth, since a corruptible belly has no appetite or stomach for food thar is incorruptible, and incorruptible food does nor trans• form itself into corruptible body? Indeed, if truth is immortal and the rational soul's perpcrual food (as it most surely is), then, whether it transforms itself inco the soul or transforms the soul into itself, it makes the soul immortal. Since, however, while the soul feeds on chis familiar food, it is filled with a pleasure which is not mingled with pain and docs not turn into disgust or sorrow, we are agreed chat rhe mind is never wearied, nor troubled by con• tact with something contrary to itself, nor able to be corrupted into something contrary. Again, since nothing is more naturally desirable to mind than truth and truth is achieved by a sort of sep• ararion from what is mortal, then nothing can be more natural or familiar to mind qua mind than to be set apart from what is mor• tal. From what is most natural, however, comes not the weakening but the intensification oflife. So the mind will be most alive when it is far from here. 
We can reinforce our present argument with an argument of 13 the Platonist Olympiodorus which he wove together from mystical teachings taken in part &om the Pythagoreans and in part from Plato-from the Phaedo and Gorgias.10 The mind, naturally hungry for the truth, continually divorces both itself from body and forms from matter; and longs and strives ro live separated in this way, aJ. though the body and the senses daily compel it in the opposite di­


• BOOK  VIII  • CHAPTER Ill  •  
rccrion. But it naturally desires chat life apart from the mortal body as the life chat is naturally, chat is, truly good, especially since it is the life entirely dedicated to truth and goodness. If such a life is good, chen it is possible; for what is impossible is also useless. But we cannot say that what is good is useless. Again, if weakness pertains to evil, strength pertains to good. Therefore everything good is by ics very nature possible. Consequently the natural appe· rite for the good is rhe appetite for something it is possible co have. Bur if even what just seems to be the good is possible, certainly what is truly the good is the most powerful of possibilities11 ; and the true goods are possible for those who seek truly and well.  
:  III  :  
Third proof: the power or virtue ofsoul, being indivisible, cannot be a quality ofbody.  
What is indivisible cannot be a quality of body. Suppose it were its quality, then the question arises, Docs it touch some divisible part of the body or some indivisible point of it? If we grant the first, then such a quality would certainly be divisible, since it makes contact in a divisible manner, and thus it would nor be the indivisible quality of the divisible pan but the divisible quality of something divisible. If we grant the second hypothesis, then the quality would be a quality only of the point it couches and not of the body; and thus what is indivisible would never be a quality of the body. But the virtue or power of the human soul is an indivisi• ble quality. Therefore soul is not body. This argument will be deemed sufficient if we clarify two points, first that virtue is a quality of soul, and second chat this virtue is indivisible. The first is obvious co anyone, since it is  1 l  
287  



through the presence of virtue that soul acquires a particular char­
acter, and is described as wise, prudent, just, brave, or temperate. 
And virtue can be lacking from the soul even as the soul remains. 
Bur chis is the characteristic of qualities. 
Now to prove the second point: char virtue is indivisible. There 3 arc two kinds of virtues, those in the inrcllcct and chose present in the appetite, whether rational or irrational. The first arc known as the speculative virtues, the second as the moral. The first arc spec­ulative because they arc acquired through speculation, and once acquired arc used in speculation. The second arc moral because they arc acquired by custom and habituation, and once acquired they govern our moral conduct and what we do. In the first cate­gory arc chc understanding of things divine, the knowledge of things natural, prudence in political matters, and rhc art and skill char produces human artifacts. In the second arc justice ( which gives to each his own), courage (which prompts us co noble ac­tions and rids us of the obstacle of fear), and temperance (which keeps us from self-indulgent sensuality, another obstacle to noble actions).ll These are how the virtues arc described in Placo.U 
Now if any bodily size exists in these virtues, the bigger a man 4 grows the wiser he could become or the more just, and it will be impossible for small men to become equal to or to surpass big men in virtue. Furthermore, the knowledge which is concerned with the largest bodies will be ampler and clearer than char concerned with smaller bodies. Bur we know about many things which we cannot march in size, and our whole soul perceives a large object just as, and just as much as, it does a tiny one. 
In short, what is speculative virtue if not the inrellccr's clarity, 5 what is moral virtue if not the unchanging flame of desire lit by the intellect's clarity? That clarity docs nor come gradually, though we reach it by a gradual process. We may have been tracking down a hare a long time but when we sec it, we sec ir suddenly. Simi• larly, from one's own experience everyone knows after a long search that one intuits in a flash what is true about the object of 

one's inquiry. The light of truth, says Plato, suddenly blazes out in 
the rational soul, not sparked by things themselves but by a pro• 
longed discussion, like a spark from a stone struck many timcs.14 
Likewise a young man is disposed to moral behaviour through 
long habituation. As long as some little thing is missing to ignite 
that unchanging and rational ardor of chc appetite, then it is nor 
sufficiently inflamed and he does not yet possess moral virtue. 
Keep blowing on it and at lase the appetite's flame, sufficient now 
for virtue, flares up suddenly. What more is there to say? If you 
turn a mirror towards the sun, the light is reflected in the mirror 
instantaneously; now place some wool before that mirror, and as soon as it has been there long enough it will straightway catch fire. So the light in the mirror is sudden and the fire in the wool is sud· den. The clarity of the truth in the intellect is equally sudden, and the flame in the desire chat springs from it is sudden. 
Lee us address the point again in the following way. Speculative 6 virtue is a knowledge of the truth. Ifit is put together in stages, then part will be present and part will be missing and looked for still. So we will know to the extent that pare of the truth will be there; bur we will not know to the extent char part will be missing. So we will know and not know the same thing at the same time. Noc even a drunkard imagines chis. So speculative virtue docs not proceed stage by stage from one part of itself to another, but blazes forth wholly and suddenly. Moral virtue too is an unwavcr• ing will to choose whatever reason dictates. If it has many parts and comes into being gradually, then part of the will will be pres­ent and part still absent. In chat a part is present, we will [somc­rhingJ; in chat a part is absent, we do not. So through the same force of the soul we will equally both want and not want the same thing simultaneously. But chis is monstrous. Therefore, because virtue comes into being at an indivisible moment of time, it is also indivisible itself ( chis is presuming chat the nature of each thing conforms co its own origin), and especially since it has an indivisi• ble end. But why isn'r what has an indivisible beginning and end also indivisible? 

What is the end of virtue? The end of moral virtue is to purify 7 and divorce the soul from che divisible body; che end of specula• tivc virtue is to comprehend the incorporeal and universal rational principles of things which arc far removed from divisible bodies. You see that the end of both kinds of virtue, like their beginning, is something indivisible and therefore that the virtues themselves muse be deemed indivisible. 
Both these virtues display a narure of rheir own principally in 8 that many different branches of knowledge are simulcaneously in the intellect, and many moral virtues simulcaneously in chc appe· rice; yec they do nor confound themselves in their mulcirude, but rather wax stronger and shine forth. We discern that our concep• tion of one branch of knowledge is different from another such char we can chink about the one without considering the other. Likewise, we have in our mind the ideas of che different produces of arc united and distinguished equally to the extent chat we can speak about the model of one idea and fashion something proper co ic, even if we do nothing about the model of another concep· cion. Such conceptions cannot be bodies, for they all so abide in the same bosom of the soul chat chey neither push nor shove themselves about nor confound themselves in murual confusion. The same argument pertains co che moral virtues. 
Moreover, though many conceptions exist in the soul of a wise 9 man, every single one ofchem is found complete in separate men. An expert on geometry or rheology certainly possesses some prop• osition about his discipline which is prime; he also possesses the second, the third, and the rest, and from the knowledge ofthe first he proceeds co the knowledge of the second. If che first proposi­tion teaches the second and the second che chird, and if whoever reaches anything possesses what is being caught in himself. then it follows that all subsequent propositions are contained in whatever proposition precedes them, and furthermore that the preceding ones are similarly present in whatever follows. It is often custom• ary to explore what comes before for evidence ofwhat comes after. This is quite reasonable since the images of causes are reflected in their effects. This universal linkage is such that a wise man can proceed at lightning speed from chinking about a single proposi­tion to many others in such a way that he sees many, indeed all of them in one proposition. Thus any one understanding is present in any other, and every single one is wholly contained in each sepa• rarely. 

The same thing happens with moral virtues: once one of them IO is acquired you immediately possess all the others. For who will make a just distribution, if he is afraid of threats or a slave to lust? Who will bravely overcome his fears if he is sapped by lust? Who will master his sensual desires if he is a prey to fear? Who, finally, will live an honorable life unless he has the practical wisdom to set himself the best goal in life and to choose the straightest routes to that end? Or who will look at things circumspectly if his mind's eye is dimmed by a cloud of vices? So the virtues are so closely tied together char they are all in one; and each virtue is contained complete in every separate virtue, just as the whole discipline of geometry is hidden away in its chief proposition, indeed in any of its propositions, since all ofthem can be elicited by the cunning of a trained mathematical intelligence from any one of them. But a divisible quality cannot be present in its entirety in many different things at the same time. It is in one thing only, that is, in one body, and it extends its different parts through the body's different parts; but its whole quantity is not present in the individual parts of the body. Hence these conceptions and moral virtues are en• tirely indivisible. 
Soul therefore can be neither body nor form divided through 11 body, since it is the subject of indivisible qualities. Hence, just as it is an insane person who inquires how large knowledge orjustice is or who supposes that geometry is smaller than the geometer's body, so it is a fool who asks how big the soul is or who supposes it tinier than the body, since it is in no way corporeal. For not only docs the soul receive things incorporeal, it also produces many incorporeals in itself when it conceives the species of things, their rational principles and acquired characteristics, and especially when it forges the definitions of incorporeal things. But who will maintain that the cause of incorporeals is corporeal, or that the subject of virtues is mortal, when the function of virtues is co op• pose what is mortal, since speculative virtue flees mortal things and moral virtue puts them ro flight. Bue quality cannot be in con• flier with its own subject. Or rather, that receptacle is necessarily immortal which is the natural receptacle of those qualities whose property it is to fight against and to dominate mortal things. Bue the force of this argument consists mainly in chc face that the soul is not only the subject but the principle coo of such qualities. And hence they arc alloctcd by the soul that nature which opposes things mortal. 


: IV : 
Fourth proof: the species or intelligible concept cannot be received by body. 
Such is the opinion ofall the Greek Platonists. We can confirm it 1 by referring to the following argument of the Arabic Placoniscs. The intellect docs nor understand anything, lee us say a man, un• less it acquires a universal form, the general signifier of men, which they call the intelligible form or species. Once it acquires chis form, it makes a judgment about the nature of man: Man is a rational animal. This judgment is called sometimes a concept or conception of the mind, sometimes the rational principle and defi­nition of the object to be known, which we usually refer to also as knowledge. If the intellect is extended by the extension of the body, the intelligible form like the conception will adhere to the body's extension. There are rwo aspects to consider in this exten­sion: a point and the extent of the extension. So the scat of the form and conception will be either some single point of the body or its extension. Ifneither ofthese is admissible, as we shall prove, then it follows chat the intellect is not extended in the body. Let us first show that a point cannot be such a scat. 

TI1e first thing to note is that a point docs not exist on its own, 2 bur is so attached to the measure of the body chat it always consti­tutes a limit of it. If the point accepts something in accordance with its own nature, it certainly never accepts it unless it is a limit ofsome magnitude which is received in the body's measure ( whose limit is a point); and accepts it such chat, just as the corporeal measure receives the magnitude of something being added to it, so the limit of such a measure receives the limit of the magnitude. So whatever is said to be received in a point of the body is not free from magnitude. Therefore, if the scar of the intelligible form is a point, it could not become a sear without chat form being divisible and having its limit in the body's point but having the rest of its parts in the body's extension. Yet in what follows we will prove that the form is indivisible. 
Furthermore, if a point were said to receive the form such that 3 it alone were the seat and foundation of it, and the form stayed separated via chis point from the body's extension, the point too would have to be separated from the extension, especially since nothing is the proper sear or subject of some accident unless it ex· ists properly in act. Such a point will be separate from a line, and nor be a part of a line or limit ofextension; and the line will be ended via some other point, the next closest to it. Again, that ocher point will similarly exist in its own ace whereby it can be­come rhc scar of the accidental form and also be separate from the line, especially since the rational principle ofall points is the same. The result of this will be either chat no point is in a line (and no claim could be more stupid, for then the line would lack limits), or else chat the line's length is made up of points (which is equally ri• diculous because we do not increase length by adding a point to a point). 
This becomes clear from the following argument. If we think 4 of three points coming one after another, our question will be whether the point in the middle forces the two at either end to keep so fur apart that they do nor touch, or whether ir docs ir nor prevent chem &om coming together. If it forces them to keep apart, obviously it does not touch one of them with the same part of itself as it touches the ocher, otherwise it would not be separat­ing chem. But if it looks co one of rhe extremes with one part ofit• self, to rhe other with another, it is constituted of two parts and, being divisible, is nor a point. So we arc obliged co admit char che point in the middle does not prevent the two ocher points &om coming into contact. In that case all would be in all. and they would never produce length by coming into contact, since no in­terval is created between the two other points via the middle point. So if the length of a body is nor made up of points, then it is impossible to find a point in char length which could ever bring itself into act in order to become the scat or subject of the intelli­gible form. 
Someone could perhaps contend char a point docs nor exist in 5 body actually bur porenrially, and chat through this potentiality ir becomes rhc subject of the intelligible form. Though this conren• tion has already been rcfurcd, the following will refute ir a second time. 
Such points, both because their existence is potential and nor 6 actual, and because they arc infinite, cannot be r:uionally discin• guished from each other in such a way that one of them rather than another might receive that intelligible form. So they all re• ceive the form. In that case, for understanding each object the in­tellect will either accept an infinite number of forms in act and si­multaneously, or it will infinitely and simultaneously understand the same thing through an infinite number of points. Either of these propositions -that the forms arc infinite in act and chat infinite acts of understanding occur simultaneously-is impossi­ble. Obviously, then, a body's point cannot be the scat of the intel­ligible species. 
But surely the unbroken continuity of points or the extension 7 of body is not going to be the seat either~ Absolutely not. For ev­ery form that is received in a divisible subject itself becomes divisi­ble, just as the snow's whiteness is divided by the snow's division. So if chat form is received by the body's extension, ic becomes ex• tended and divided. However, it is imposssible for it to become such a divisible form, as I shall straightway prove. If the form were cur up into parts, people would call chose parts either completely identical or different. Bur neither of these alternatives is admissi­ble. We cannot allow the pares to be entirely identical, because, if they were so alike char the rational principle of the whole form or species were wholly present in every part (as the principle of all water is wholly preserved in every single drop of water), then the intellect would certainly see the whole in every pare; and one of the species's parts would suffice for an understanding of the whole, and the ocher parts would be unnecessary. 
Moreover, by way of such a divisible species ( which everywhere 8 totally resembles itself and by chis resemblance deceives the intel­lect thence summoned to understand it), the judgment of the in• tellect would be utterly confounded in distinguishing the parts from the whole, both in the case of anything comprised of parts, but principally in the case ofan object compounded from various natures. Nor would it be able to distinguish parts from parts or pares from the whole. However the part qua part is logically different from the whole qua whole; and this is always affirmed by the judgment of the inccllcct, since the whole cannot be the part nor the part the whole. We must therefore, I believe, reject the no­tion that the parts of a divisible species arc completely alike, prin• cipally on the grounds chat, since the mind understands a thing's parts qua parts and the whole qua whole and distinguishes the whole from the pares, and chat it could not truly distinguish unless some natural distinction existed among them, it follows that the parts of an intelligible species, were it to have parts, would differ both from each ocher and from the whole by some distinction in nature. 
There is another reason as well. Parts which arc completely like 9 each other and like the whole, when by mutual aggregation they assemble some whole, perfect it only through an increase of num­ber or size (as we sec with grains of wheat or drops of water). For where the form docs not change but nevertheless some kind of in­ner alteration occurs, the resulc in a way is increase or decrease. So this species of the mind, if it were aggregated from such parts, would be a number or some sort of plurality or an accumulation or a continuum. With it, therefore, we would understand only numbers and pluralities or certain magnitudes or figures: it would be a species pertaining more to the imagination and phancasy than co the mind. 
This leads one to conclude that the inrclligible form is not in-10 cernally divided into similar parts. Is it perhaps divided into dis­similar parts, like an animal's body into bones, layers of flesh, and muscles:' Certainly not. For, as we have already pointed out, it is by means of chis form chat the mind learns what the substance of a thing is. A thing's substance is understood first and foremost in its definition. The definition consists of genus and differencia, the definition of man for instance is that he is an animal and rational. Animal is the genus through which man shares the general charac­tcristics of the rest of the animals. Being r:itional is the differencia which sets him apart from the :inima1s lacking reason. So if :iny distinction of pares existed in that form, it would be first and fore• most in terms ofgenus and diffcrcntia. Just suppose that these two arc the parrs of the intelligible form and th:it they arc extended across the extent of the body. Attend to the consequences. 
Since the parts of a body can be infinitely divisible, both genus 11 and differentia would be split up infinitely with chem, and in one single definition would be infinite genera and infinite differenciae. It would not be a real definition, because it could not be comprc• hended by the incellecc if it were infinite, nor would it be limited by its own terms; and-what is even more absurd-we would ei• chcr replicate to infinity the same genera and the same diffcrentiae, or ascend by the process of resolution from genus co genus ad infinitum, or similarly descend by the process of division from differentia to differencia. Such an ascent and descent is impossible, because true reason must eventually arrive at the prime genera in objects and at the ultimate differcnciae, beyond which one is not at liberty co proceed, since substance is the highest genus in man, and this cannot be resolved into another genus; bur the ultimate differencia is a particular capacity for discursive thought, which cannot be narrowed down co another diffcrentia. \Vhat preemi• nenrly compounds chis error, however, is that if the genus and differentia in some object were infinite, such objects would effec• tively exist. For the things which contribute to the essence of an object and belong to the natural order and exist effectively and truly in nature arc not figments of human thought. Nature how• ever does not allow such an infinite plurality actually or effectively co exist, especially in body. Yet an infinite plurality would exist in body if infinite genera and infinite differenciae were equally dis• tributed through the body's parts: for then there would be an equally infinite number of che body's parts too. 
Again, let us question the Epicureans who divide up the single 12 species in the intellect like the form in the body, and locarc one part of it in one part of the mind, rhe genus, for example, in the right part and the differentia in the left: let us ask them why should the right pare be more suited co the genus and the left to the differenria? Surely every pare of mind is equally mind, other­wise mind would be made up of parts lacking mind? Therefore cv• cry particle of mind pertains equally co genus and to differcntia, and so receives both. If every part receives both and both are in each, then they are nor separated from each other. Bur actually, the Epicureans claim, chance causes one of them to fall on the right part, the other on the left. But let them cell us whether the two then continue to remain distinct or do they intermingle? If they maintain the first, then it follows that they arc not the source of knowledge. For no definition emerges when genus and differ• cntia arc separate from each other. Perfect knowledge of the object in question cannot exist in either of them when separated. They muse be combined into one for a single mind to be able to have a single knowledge of a single object by means of a single definition at a single point in time. For each has to be present in the mind as a whole if each is to be truly understood, for what is in a part of the mind is not yet wholly understood. For action proceeds from the whole of something not from a part. The Epicureans muse ad· mit then that the two are intermingled. 
But what causes the mixing? Is it the result of chance or mind? 13 Ir is by chance, they say. But chat is an impious assertion. For such a mixing would be extremely rare. And when it did happen they would then concede that the components joined in chis way arc in• corporeal -and that is what we ourselves wish co prove -and concede at last that they arc mixed by mind. From chis concession we can immediately draw two conclusions: first char che mind is incorporeal if it leads the forms it receives into an incorporeal con• dition or habit -and this view is opposed by chc Epicureans; and second that this mixing brought about by the mind is not a true mixing unless such a union exists in the objects themselves. For what is invented by the mind over and beyond the nature of things is fiction rather than knowledge. Bur genera and differentiae must be either wholly mixed together or wholly separated in nature and not in a mental fiction or location. For if the mixing stems from a mental fiction, then we are erring and not learning. But if it comes from a mental location such that the genus is in the right part of the mind and the differcntia in the left, then, since the mind is al­lowed to divide or resolve these general concepts, it will divide them. In this division they will be dissected in a corporeal way and one half of the genus will be permitted to remain in one half of the mind's right part, and the other half, in the other half. The same will happen with the diffcrcntia. Then further division will become possible. The result will be dismemberment not resolu­tion: in tearing apart the general concepts, we will destroy knowl• edge. But if the general concepts arc nor torn apart through divi• sion bur the genus remains in every part of itself complete, and the diffcrentiae likewise, then they will no longer be corporeal, because they do nor need any particular quantity. Certainly, anyone who is going to rear apart in this way will find innumerable genera and innumerable differemiac; and yer rhe multitude of these will nor exist in nature, but be born from the mind's contrivance. 
To avoid these objections the Epicureans perhaps will no longer 14 grant char the intelligible species consists of genus and differentia, claiming instead chat it comes from other parts. But we will in• quire whether a part of a species, whatever it is, differs from the species as a whole or not. If it is docs not differ, then obviously what does not differ from the whole will not be a part but the whole; and the species will nor be compounded if it does nor differ from its parts, since in this case it will contain no diversity of parts. So they will confess rhar a part of the species differs from the species. Bur we will inquire of them in what way docs it differ. 
311 
• BOOK Vlll • CHAPTER IV · 
If it docs not differ as the genus or diff erentia differ from the spc• cies, as we have demonstrated, then docs it at least differ as one species differs from another or as color from shape? But this is in• admissible. For such a species is not within the species; nor is shape included under color. Yee chc part exists within chc whole and is contained by it. 
To prove that this species and conception of the mind has pares 15 which arc included under it, they will perhaps resort to numbers and infer that the species differs from its parts as four does from two or two from one. Despite our having refuted this point above, we will do so again as follows. Do they wish chc pares of the spe• cies and conception which they call knowledge to be themselves branches of knowledge? If they do not, they will be creating knowledge out of things without knowledge, as though chey were fashioning whiteness our ofshapes. If they do, then we will deploy the following argument against them. Philosophers arc generally agreed char every branch of knowledge has its own object with which it is concerned, and this they call chc thing known. Now let our adversaries cell us, given char che branches of knowledge that arc pares of one knowledge ought not co lack an object, whether the proper object ofeach of the branches of knowledge is chc same as, or different from, that of the whole ofknowledge. If chcy retort that it is the same, then none of the branches will be a part, bur each will be the whole since it is equal to the whole. For when their objects arc equal, then the branches of knowledge arc equal too. But if they say chc proper object is different, then chc same absurdity follows, for the knowledge itself of che whole of che thing known will be beyond the knowledge of the pares. The whole will not be known from knowing the parts when the indi­vidual branches of knowledge do not concur in a whole or univer­sal knowledge. 
But Ice us rake up the question again. Mind fur che most pare 16 understands that a rational principle of things is one and univer· 
313 
sal, just as goodness itself is common co many good things. In that it is one and universal, such a rational principle is also simple. The rational principle of God or angel, whenever it is truly known, is adjudged as indivisible. These rational principles arc called intelli­gible essences, and our mind would never know them if it did not have their forms in itself as images. For if in knowing mind acts at all, it neither aces unless ie is in ace, nor aces in any way ocher than in acc. But it is brought into ace by form: it never contem­plates the essences unless it is adorned with the forms of these same essences. Such forms, though they arc sometimes called in­telligible, ought more properly to be called intellectual and the es­sences called intelligible. 15 For this was the practice of the ancient Platonists. Ifan intellectual form, the image in our mind of an in­telligible essence, is split into parts, then those parts arc such that either none of the pares regards the essence itself, or one part does indeed regard it but not another pare, or all of chem do. If we grant the first alternative, then the form as a whole will not regard the essence in any way, since in the parts there is no regarding it. For just as the whole form consists of parts, so the regard of the whole is aggregated from the [separate] regards of the parts. But if the form does not look to the essence, then it will not be its image, nor contribute to [ our] understanding ofit. If we grant the second alternative, the pare chat does not regard the essence will never at­tain the intellectual form because it is not looking at the intelligi­ble essence. If we grant the third alternative, we shall immediately ask whether each part has the same view or different pares have a different view. If the answer is that they have same view, and if they cannot have the same view unless each pare turns back to the whole essence, then obviously none of chem will be just a part of the intellectual form but each and every one will be the whole form. One of the pares will be sufficient for understanding; the rest will be superRuous and even be infinite in act if they are split up by the body's division and contribute to action. But if different parts have different views, and the only way chis can happen is if the form's individual parts view the essence's corresponding parts (seeing that the intellectual muse be equal to the intelligible), then it follows that rhe essence is divisible, whereas true reasoning has concluded it is simple. True reasoning could not adjudge the es­sence simple if it did not view it with a simple glance. With the multiple glance of the various parts, however, it would acljudge it multiple. 
We believe chat the Epicureans fell into chis error because of 17 their view that some branches of knowledge are concerned with composite objects. An example would be the knowledge of man, who is compounded of animal and rational as his genus and differencia; or the knowledge of the number seven and the number ten and ocher numbers which are compounded from numbers or units. Jc is our view however chat man qua man is something one and simple, since his form is one. The proof of chis is that man cannot be divided into many men. For if you divide man by spe­cies into genus and differencia, neither of chem is man; on the ocher hand, if you divide man by pares into head, chest, thigh, none ofthese is man. You are cucring up the body, because you are chopping it into limbs which are in face bodies, but you are nor curring up man, because you are not cutting man into men. But what is such and such in itself, and is not divided into a number of such, is clearly, insofar as it is such, simple and indivisible. The number ten as such is not divisible, for it is a single species and a single form which we cannot divide into many tens. If we do di­vide it, we are dividing a number because we are dividing into numbers: but we are not dividing ten because we are nor dividing it into tens. The fact chat genus and differentia seem to be in­cluded in the species does not constitute an objection co chis. For there are not two forms in the species but one. For although co be an animal is one thing in the order of things, to be rational an­other, yet in man it is the same, and, to put it Platonically, man's nature is a certain rationality. But rationality in man is nothing other than "animalness" itself led forth into the act of reason. But such a simple form as this, the basis of a simple being, is a species which does not divide itself up into individual men, but communi• cates itself to them individually as a whole. Through this species the individuals are one, but they differ through other, external ac• crecions which have nothing to do with the species. This shows the species' simpliciry. Another, not unimportant demonsrr:uion of this simplicity is that the species docs not admit of more or less and has a fixed place in the order of nature where nothing can be added to it and nothing taken away without the species itself changing. 
The species of numbers arc evidence of this. Seven is a species 18 of number. Add one to chis and you create a new species, namely eight. Take one away and you have six, again a new species of number. But since knowledge properly is not of individuals or gen• era bur of the species (for individuals, being innumerable and changeable, arc neither understood nor grasped as certainties, and genera, because of the confusion in themselves, arc not perfectly distinguished)-since, I say, knowledge is of the species and the species are simple, then the knowledge of them is also simple if knowledge is in any way the acquisition of truth. But truth is the equating of things with minds.16 Neither the multitude of words nor the variety and number of thoughts from which it seems knowledge is perhaps produced ought to trouble us. These are the preparations for or attendants on knowledge. Knowledge is a unitary act or habit, the simple act ofa simple form, che undivided intuition of the undivided truth, the sudden light of the under­standing. 
The error of the Epicureans is manifestly refined by chc fact 19 that there are many branches of knowledge about things which are indisputably indivisible. Who for instance can divide unity? or simplicity and purity~ Who can divide simple being? Whatever we divide, moreover, we divide into parts prior to chc whole. Bue these indivisible things arc not made from any prior parts at all. We rcsolvc'7 man into animal and rational, animal into body and scncicncy, body into substance and quantity, substance into being and a sufficiency for subsisting. But I really have no idea into what parts we can resolve being itself into, unless perchance Plotinus and Proclus would resolve it into unity and the many; but in fact they cannot resolve unity itself any further. Nobody can resolve unity into numbers, or resolve a point into magnitudes, or the ul­timate form of an object into another form, or prime matter into [ other forms of) matter. And nobody can take chose simple con• ccpts of our mind, which shed light unceasingly on the principles of the branches of knowledge among us, and refer them to better known or prior concepts. When resolution scops, division stops, and when division stops, perfect simplicity is attained. 
We should therefore conclude chat the prime concepts of the 20 mind arc simple, and that the things which arc learned from chem arc partly such that, although they may appear to be divided, nonetheless they arc recognized by the reason as if they were not divided and therefore our notion of them is indivisible; and partly such chat they arc absolutely simple, and therefore our perception of them is simple, if only our understanding is matched or equated with the things known. 18 If concept, notion, and perception arc all simple, then the inrelligiblc forms whence they arc born arc also simple. If chis is so, then the mind too is simple, being the subject of such simple forms. And because the simpler a thing is the more indivisible it is, and since the mind attains the highest level of sim­plicity, as we said, in knowing, then it also attains the highest level of indivisibility in living. For understanding is the turning back of life upon itself. Thus, if through understanding, which succeeds life, the mind attains the highest level of simplicity, which precedes 
321 
indivisibility, then afortiori it attains through life, which precedes 
understanding, the level of indivisibility which succeeds simplicity 
itself. 
: V : 
Fifth proof if mind is body, then it understands by making contact and moving around. 
Ifmind is body or is form spread through the body's magnitude, 1 then it has two aspects, as we indicated elsewhere, point and ex­tension; and it is enslaved to the same conditions as body. So the only way it will understand intelligible objects will be by contact­ing chem and by spreading itself through and traversing them after the fashion of a body. To understand them, therefore, it makes contact, we will say, either by a point alone, or by extension alone, or by both. Ifit uses a point only and it needs contact for know­ing, it will not know the magnitudes of things; for it is making contact through a point with points, not with magnitudes. Even if it did make contact with magnitude, it would never get to know the whole or the wholes; for points arc infinite in a whole and infinite also in a magnitude. The accumulation of all the points is intellect, but the accumulation of the magnitudes is in a way mag­nitude. le is impossible to traverse infinite points. So the whole mind will never understand, and it will never understand the whole magnitude. Therefore it docs nor use a point alone. 
Well then, does it use its extension only for making contact~ 2 Certainly not. For it would only know things contacted by its ex­tension. Bur these arc only the things which arc extended in its ex­tension. In reality, however, we know many other things besides these. Some will have recourse to arguing char the mind uses both for knowing: a point for simple things, extension for the rest. This may seem plausible but it is not true. In the first place, through a point it will only contact simple objects which are attached to the body like a point: it will not make contact with independent forms or numbers. Secondly, through its extension the mind will traverse the entire magnitude of the body in order to know it completely. But any extension cannot traverse the full extent, whatever it is, of some magnitude unless, with every pare of itself, it fully traverses every part of that extent. So the mind will conduct its own indi­vidual pares toward each part ofthe body it wanes to know by tra­versing them in order, and, in so doing, it will come to know them. But it will be conducting parts which are more or less infinite. For the mind will have infinite parts ifit exists as a corpo• real extension. So it will understand, measurelessly as it were, ev­ery portion ofthat body in an instant. And ir will apprehend the body itself according to the almost infinite particles known in chis measureless way, and apprehend it measurelessly, in infinite chang• ing conditions as it were. 

Let us briefly conclude this discussion with a notable opinion of 3 our Plocinus.19 All things understood arc either naturally simple or at least understood when they are made simple through the process of resolution. Bue since indivisibles are only grasped by in­divisibles, the power in us which grasps such indivisible things is indivisible. So if the mind is held to be corporeal, it will grasp them not with its corporeal extension bur rather with something indivisible. If it grasps them with chis alone, it understands them with chis alone. So only this indivisible part of it will truly be mind. To be the intellect why require other pares, when ochers are not needed for understanding, since chat one indivisible part is enough? So this one part is the mind. Hold onto it and set the rest aside: you have attained the mind in its simplicity. 
The simplicity of the mind is also evident from the fact that it 4 understands the point without length, the line without breadth, the surface without depth, numbers without place, beauty without any taint ofugliness. For in its consideration it discerns them thus separately; and it does not consider chem in any way other than it receives them. But corporeal form does not receive these things separately at all. If the rational soul's simplicity and indivisibility is dearly shown by the face chat it understands things that are simple and indivisible, then it is shown even more dearly by the fact that it takes things which in themselves would be simple and indivisible and yet beingjoined with ochers emerge as composite and divided, and separates them from their opposites, restoring them again to their utter simplicity and indivisibility. But it would not be able to restore their simple and indivisible nature to them unless it was simple and indivisible itself. Finally, ifit restores purity to what are polluted, it is itself above and beyond pollution. 

: VI : 
Sixth proof: intellect receives whatever it receives in accordance with its whole self; it would not do this if it were corporeal. 
No body contains something in itself except by way of being ade-1 quately adapted for quantity by virtue of which it can include the whole object in the whole of itself: a part in a part, a larger part of the included thing in a larger part of itself, a smaller part in a smaller. This is not the way in which the intellect takes hold of things; for whatever it receives it grasps with its whole self. 20 And ir grasps in the same way it understands. But it understands what· ever ir understands with its whole self. 
Suppose someone were to say that the inrellecr has two corpo• 2 real pares, one of which grasps a rhing and understands it, the other of which docs not, then we would refute him by insisting that the intellect is really the part that grasps and understands, since from understanding it is called the intellect; bur the part that docs not understand is nor the inrcllcct. So that nature which is truly intellect grasps anything to be understood and comes to know it with its whole self. Thus when it understands the human body, it understands too the members of that body: it comes to know the whole body with its whole self and it comes to know each of the body's parts with its whole self. For he who compares one member to another or any member to the whole must have knowledge of the individual members and the whole body alike. Nor should you posit two parts to the intellect, one to know one member, the other another. For via neither of these parts could chat comparison be made. 


If the mind grasps a thing in the same ways as it knows it, then 3 dearly it grasps the whole body with the whole of itself as well as the body's individual members. But no body and no corporeal form can grasp anything in this way; nor can any one body mea• sure up to all other bodies. How will the body of a dog measure up against that ofan ant, a horse, an elephant, the sun? The mind on the other hand docs measure up to all bodies, the largest and the smallest equally, since it includes all alike in its understanding. And besides measuring up to them, it is even in a sense equal to absolute equality when, through its access to absolute equality, it correctly measures all things as more or less equal. Mind is here inserting itself as intermediary between everything that partici­pates in equality itself and absolute equality. But if it comes closest to equalling absolute equality, it is not at all disturbed by the in• equality of unequal qualities. 

• BOOK VIII • CHAPTER Vil · 
: VII : 
Seventh proof: intellect does not lose its own form when it receives the forms ofobjects; the opposite is true of bodies. 
It is normal for bodies when they take on the forms ofocher bod-1 ies to lose their own. For how will water assume the heat of fire unless it lays aside its own coldness~ And if ever, having accepted an alien form, its own form also remains, it becomes very imper• fecc, as when the sweetness remains in a wine after water has been added to it and itself becomes sweet, but the resulting taste is very bland. But the mind receives the forms of all objects when it un­derstands them all and ponders in itself the forms it understands. But by receiving them it does not lose or weaken its own form. Since the habit of any form is always indicated by its activity, and since the activity of the intellect is understanding, it follows chat che form of intellect is itself a natural intellectuality-if I may use che expression -which is judged to have reached its full perfection when its activity, understanding, is at its most perfect. The more the forms understanding attains to, the more perfect it is, for it be­comes loftier, swifter, and brighter. 
So the intellect, in receiving the forms of all bodies, not only 2 docs not lose or weaken its hold on its own form, it actually brings it to full perfection -which is the contrary to the nature of the body. 21 It penetrates into their substances and sees all things in each individual thing when by way of composition it sees things mixed in things simple, and by way of resolution things simple in things mixed. 21 Thus the mind appears to be in all things such that it is all things in each individual thing. Again, it is above and beyond all things corporeal, otherwise it would not be able to dis­tinguish chem from things incorporeal and distinguish the incor­poreal from chem. If it is all things in all things corporeal, and is also beyond all things, it must naturally rule over them all. Thus it cannot be dislodged from its habirual condition by the violence of any body. 
: VIII : 
Eighth proof: form in mind is universal; such cannot exist in body. 
Body and form that is extended through body are so material and so much restricted to a particular place and time that they have no universal power. The closer a thing gets to corporeal matter, the more restricted it is; the further away it gets, che ampler it be­comes. So if intellect were body or form diffused through body, all the forms received by it, even if in themselves they were universal, in it would cum out at least co be completely particular and mate• rial. For forms contained within a subject that is tied to the passivities of matter retain no capacity for representing anything universal. Thus whatever the intellect chinks it would think in terms of a material form, limited to particular conditions. But since each thing's activity follows on the form of the thing doing the acting, the intellect acting through such a form (that is, think­ing) would only think in terms of particulars. But the character of the activity always determines the result. So intellect, thinking in terms of particulars, would be chinking about particulars alone and have no knowledge ofanything general and universal. It would ponder one particular man, say Socrates or Plato, but not the hu­man nature equally common to them both. le would not establish a general overall rule for moral conduct or the arts, and never es­tablish a law governing men's many activities.11 

If the mind gives birth ro universal forms in irsclf every day 
2 
even without choosing ro and without pracrice, it muse be their narural source and natural receptacle. Such universal forms are nor attached to any particular matter of their own. Neither is the mind then tied to matter, nor is it ever corrupted; for corruption results from being ambushed by matter. 
: IX : 
Ninth proof: minds mutually embrace each other but bodies do not. 
Two corporeal objects cannot contain each other in a mutual cm-1 brace. For what contains another quantitatively must be larger than what is contained. Bur no one body can simulcaneously be both larger and smaller than another single body. The sphere of Sarurn surrounds and contains the sphere of Jupiter but not the reverse. But one mind does contain another mind and is equally contained by it. My mind thinks about yours, yours about mine. So our minds, in thinking mutually about each other, grasp each ocher in rum; and in doing so they understand, and in under­standing, enfold.14 And more importantly, a single mind embraces all minds when it thinks about the narure ofall minds. So, ifeach mind gazes upon any mind ( which in fact it can do if it focuses its attention), then any mind at all is encompassed by any other mind. But for any body at all to be encompassed by any other body is impossible. 
If any species of things at all is immortal, it follows char a par-2 ricular substance that compares or equates itsclfl5 to its own spe­cies must be immortal. But any mind looks within, peradventure, at other minds; and it sees in the individual minds the species of chem all; and it docs so when, through the reflective action which is knowing, it compares or equates itself to its own species. There• fore also through the direct, non-reflective action26 which is life, it has, prior co knowing, [already] compared or equated itself co the same species. Ifchis is so, it follows either that any mind always did and will exist, like the species itself of minds, or at least that it always will exist as the species does. 


: X : 
Tenth proof: mind operates through all bodies and above bodies. 
Since form is the principle of activity, everything acts in accor-1 dance with its own genus. That is why all things, if possible, pro­duce an offspring like themselves in their own species; nothing acts in a manner foreign to its own genus. Not even lower beings act outside their own species {a dog for instance never gives birth to a sheep), and much less does anything act above its species. How for instance would a dog produce a man:' If follows then that the body cannot extend its capacity to act beyond its own genus, much less above its nature. So it will never make contact with, take hold of, or produce either any body or bodiless entities. If intellect were a body, it would be a particular body in a particular species of bodies. This would lead to two absurd consequences. 
In the first place it would nor accept or conceive of the forms of 2 many bodies. It would not grasp the forms of bodies like itself be­cause it would already possess chem; for how can fire receive the form of another fire:' And it would not conceive or give birth to forms of bodies unlike itself; for every nature gives birth to some• thing like itself. Bur in order for it to understand something, it 


must first accept the form for understanding ir, then conceive of its definition or reason from the form; and then only is under­standing complete. So the number of bodies the intellect would know if it were a body would be very small, because it would not accept the form of any body like itself. or conceive of the form of any body unlike itself; and it would nor be able to understand un­less it accepted and conceived equally. Ifthere were any way for it to accept or ro conceive of some corporeal form, it would obvi­ously do so only in accordance with its own nature. Ifit were go­ing to accept the form from elsewhere, it would assimilate it to its own nature. Ifit were going to conceive it from within, it would give birth to it in accordance with its own nature. Through any form that it receives or even conceives, therefore, it would always apprehend a certain species of body which is compatible or con• grucnt with itself: it would not contemplate the range ofcorporeal kinds. But in actual fact we do sec the mind not only paying atten• tion co all existing bodies, but also imagining at will an infinite number of various others. 
The second absurd consequence is that if intellect were body, it 3 would nor rise above the rank of bodies, since bodies hardly ever do anything outside their own species and certainly never above their own genus. So mind would never know incorporeals. Tell me, which do you think superior, substance or action! Obviously substance which is the cause ofaction itself. So we must be careful never to argue that action is more excellent than substance. The mind's activity would be superior to substance, however, if its sub­stance were merely a particular body and yet its understanding un• dcrstood both all bodies and incorporeals. So intellect is not body, since over and beyond all bodies it also apprehends incorporeals.27 
Nor is it some form mingled with the body, for just as a min· 4 gled form is divided via the body's division so is it qualified via the body's quality. Thus the mind would collect from the body a par· ticular quality for itself, and through it, having become bound to a particular species of corporeal objects, it would only know that particular specit:3 of corporeal objects ( vision is similarly restricted through the eye to colors): and it would not grasp forms either most like [itself], as we said, or even most unlike. This view of Arisrocle's is upheld by the Platonists. But the Platonists add that if mind were mixed it would not grasp incorporeals, because what is mixed does not understand the things char are pure; and it would not yearn to attain something independent of body, lest it were yearning to be separated from the body and destroyed; nor would it know unless it were moved (as is the case with a material power). But in point offact it is not insofar as it is moved but in• sofar as it makes species for itself char it abstracts, discursively rea• sons, and almost endlessly reAects upon itself. 

And let our ears be spared some obstreperous Epicurean deny· ing that the intellect can grasp incorporeals. For incorporeals are what the intellect always longs for and grasps only with the great• est delight as most like itself. Nor does it only long for and grasp them, it also brings them into being. What else are we trying to do in this present argument but with the hands so to speak of our mind mould something at the furthest remove from body? We have fashioned it and we are now fashioning it; we are kneading it with the very hands of the mind. But before fashioning it, we saw a picture of what required fashioning. As soon as we decided to prove that the soul is incorporeal, then we were already envisaging somewhere a degree of incorporeal nature and wanting to lead the soul up to it. What do you suppose we are doing daily in discus­sion? Every time we say that something exists which docs indeed exist but has no length or breadth or depth or any quality or shape, then we arc creating in the mind some spirit which is supe• rior to body and the body's passions. Our mind certainly exists where it is giving birch. It is giving birth, I say, to offspring like it• self and not in any way superior to its own substance. So our mind transcends our bodies and their conditions. So it is not 
bounded by space or circumscribed by temporal limits. So it can exist everywhere and forever. Thus nothing prevents it from being eternal. 
: XI : 
Eleventh proof: mind benefits from rest, body from motion. 
Body can never receive a new form except via motion. For it is by I means of what the natural philosophers call alteration chat form is introduced into matter. Mind, however, neither receives forms via motion, nor is it moved by receiving chem. The more tranquil it becomes away from all the mocion accompanying passion or busi• ncss, the more progress it makes in contemplating. This is further evidence for the mind's immortality, since it yearns in its own nature for the concemplation alone of truth and consequently for the repose without which contemplation is impossible. Bue body benefits from movement, for through movement ic was born. So what benefits from being at rest has its source in rest, and there­fore has an unchanging and eternal subscance.28 
: XII : 
Twelfth proof opposites in matter are not opposites in mind. 
The forms of contrary elements are contrary to each other as long 1 as they are in matter, because they repel and destroy each ocher. But in mind they are not contraries, because there they not only 
• PLATONIC THEOLOGY • 
supcrficiem. Fiunt auccm huiusmodi rerum imagines non a corpo• ribus his quorum imagines sunt ( corpus cnim non procrcat aliquid incorporeum), scd a lurnine spirira!i corporibus circumfuso. Lu­men quoque ipsum a solis globo non nascitur sed a solis anima, cuius lux cum intra se sit invisibilis, effusa longius fit visibilis;59 in qua ipsa quoque anima fir conspicua. Nam ut placer Orphicis er Hcracliro, lumen nihil a!iud est nisi visibilis anima, undc per hoc omnia rcviviscunr; anima vero lux invisibilis. 
2 Scd ne longius digrediamur, formae vcl imagines corporum non vcrc60 sunt in speculis. Mens aurem corporum accipit omnium for­mas, quando de corporibus iudicar. Num accipit verc? Vere pro­fccro. Ncrnpe ut accipir, ira iudicat. Vere iudicat, vcrc igitur acci­pir. Accipir, inquam, a sc ipsa, ur Plaronici opinanrur, quando corporum simulacris cxcitara, forrnas quac in mcnris abdiris61 la­tent promit in lucem. Acccdir quod ubi pcrfcctior forrna est, ibi est vcrior. Quanro vcro perfccrior sit62 forma corporum in mcntc quam in ipsis corporibus, er alias dcclaravimus dcdarabimusquc. Er hinc parer quod humana narura in Plarone vcl Socratc solius Platonis est er solius Socraris propria. Humana aurcm natura ilia, quac menrc concipicur, quando sub una hominis dcfinirione horni­nurn condiriones considcrar, ad singulos homincs haber vim, siqui­dem omncs cornplecritur. 
3 Praeterea, si veritas rei cuiusque in pura intcgrirate consisrit vel inrcgra purirarc, arque forma in materia vim suam intcgram non retinet proptcr passionis admixtionem et cxrrancis accidenribus circumfunditur, verior res quacque invcnicur in menrc, ubi rci ip­sius idea naturalirer insita notionem rci parit, nccessaria quidem indudentem omnia, supervacua vero pcnitus cxcludcntcm. Mens chc bodies whose images chcy arc, for a body docs not produce anyrhing incorporeal: chcy come from chc spiritual light that sur­rounds the bodies. And chat lighc coo is not born from the sun's sphere but from chc sun's soul. whose light, though it is invisible within itself, when radiated afar becomes visible; and in chis very light chc soul coo comes into view. For in the opinion both of Or­pheus' disciples and of Hcraclirus, lighc is nothing ocher chan visi­ble soul (whence all things come co life again because of it) and soul is invisible light. 11 
Bur let us digress no longer. We were saying chat the forms or 2 images ofbodies arc not really in mirrors. Mind on the ocher hand receives the forms of all sorts of bodies whenever it makes judg­ments abouc bodies. Bue docs it truly receive chem~ Yes, ir truly docs. For as it receives, so does it judge. It judges truly, so ic truly receives. le receives, I should add, from itself, as the Platonisrs suppose, when, awakened by bodies' reflections, it brings the forms which arc hidden in ics own recesses into the lighc. More• over, where the form is more perfect, rhc truer it is. We have dcm• onsrrarcd elsewhere, and will do so again, how chc form of bodies is much more perfect in chc mind than in bodies themselves. It is evident also from the face char human nature in Plato or Socrates belongs to Plato alone or to Socrates alone; whereas human nature chat is conceived in rhc mind, when it considers the conditions of men under the single definition of man, applies to all individual men since it includes chem all. 
If chc truth of an object consists in its pure integrity and in ics 3 integral purity, moreover, and rhe form in matter docs not retain its integral power because of the admixture ofpassivity, and is sur• rounded by external accidents, then each thing is found to be truer in the mind. For in the mind che idea of rhe object itself is naru­rally innate and gives birch to the notion of the object which in­cludes everyching char is necessary and omits everything com­plecely that is superfluous. So the mind truly receives bodies' forms to the extent that it has them even more rruly than bodies' matter has them. So if mind itself were a corporeal entity, it would become entirely whatever bodies are. Thus it would become water when it understands water, and fire when it understands fire. And because ic simultaneously understands heat and cold, it would be­come these opposites simultaneously. But in point offace mind re­ceives the forms of everything without being dislodged from its own condition, or rather by receiving them it is perfected. 

Hence it is dear that the intellect is nor corporeal. Jl It is equally 4 clear it is noc mortal. For it receives whatever it receives in accor­dance with its mode of being. Its being is only intellectual. So the only way it receives anything is by understanding. By receiving in this way not only does it not lose, it gains. So it receives nothing from outside which would change or destroy it. What is more, it gains so much from receiving all manner offorms that it seems co benefit even from receiving evils.B If the more it knows, the more perfect it is, it is clearly more perfect if it discerns privations, weaknesses, and evils than if ic is unaware of them. So things thac in themselves are evil and harmful become in the mind good and beneficial. It is impossible for things evil and harmful ever co de­stroy thac nature which so converts the bad into the good chat for it all things are good. 
: XIV: 
Fourteenth proof: the activity ofbody aims at something compound, the activity ofmind at things simple. 
Each thing's activity always follows on its very being, such char it is 1 the activity of that being, and ics mode ofacting is the same as its mode of being, and the product which is the goal of its activity re­

scmbles ic as its producer. In objects composed of marrcr and bodily form, being belongs neither to the marrer nor to the form but to the whole compound resulting from the union of the rwo. So the activity too properly belongs to the compound itself. So it aces in a composite way and its produce is composite. We can sec this in the case of clements, plants, and animals; they generate produces that are composite like themselves. If intellect were some body compounded from matter and form, and given that its activ­ity is understanding, this understanding itself would always result in something composite. Thus it would never understand anything except composite objects. Bur in actuality our mind is so far above the compositencss of nature that it resolves compound bodies into matter and form and ponders them separately. H But each on its own is simple. The mind's superiority is particularly evident from the fact that it understands as true things which in a way arc illu­sory in nature, for example, figures and the rational principles of figures. What is impure in matter it discerns as pure. For qualities which arc mingled together in matter and tainted by opposites it distinguishes according to their proper reasons. Things which in themselves arc many it secs as one, an infinite number of men for instance in a single species. Things which in themselves arc mobile it observes at rest when it takes the parts of time which in them• selves arc fluid, gathers chem together, and links the past and fu. cure to the present. Things at a distance from each other it most often secs as united, as when it secs a whole circle or disk in a point. Neither the intervals of time nor those of space constrict the mind's gaze. What arc dead in a way it secs as living; for stones which arc lifeless the mind possesses within itself as living when it compares them to the first life by which they were created. And what arc corruptible the mind secs as everlasting when it cakes individual bodies which are subject to place and time, and with its intuitive gaze frees chem from places and from times. 
One concludes from all this that intellect is not a corporeal ob-1 jeer, as it operates in a manner very different from bodies, nor is it impure, polluted, dispersed, changeable, or corruptible; for even things which arc such can be liberated from these imperfections by the particular power the intellect possesses. 



: xv : 
Fifteenth proof: an action ofmind has the action as its end, ,m action ofbody ends in a body. 
Strictly speaking a bodily action never ends in the action itself, but 1 passes over inco external matter. For were it to end in the action, the action would remain in the agent and then the agent would be acting on itself, fire for instance would be hearing itself. TI1is can­not happen with body, because if body docs not act of itself, then too it docs not act on itself. And again if whatever body docs it docs by moving, certainly, since it is incapable of moving itself, it cannot act on itself. We can sec, however, that the activity of mind, understanding itself, docs come to an end in itself, and docs not of itself do anything externally, unless perchance it moves the will at some point; and the will by moving the arms produces ex­ternally such a work as was first conceived. But we describe scnsc­pcrccpcion as in a way a flowing outside itself, because it is moved from outside, it looks at what is outside, and it acts for the sake of some outside goal without being conscious of itself. Mind to the contrary is moved of its own free will, it gazes at itself and its own belongings, and it acts for its own benefit. TI1at is why in Plato es­sence is called a state of rest, because if it exists without life it is inactive. Bue life is called morion, because life is issuing already into act; and mind is called reflection or turning back, since, but for this turning back, life would Row out into some external work.35 Bue mind hales che essence's living morion in itself, and re• Reccs che motion back cowards rhe essence by a sort of reflection on itself. le also draws everything else co itself in proportion as it considers things, not as they exist externally, bur rather as it exisrs irself as the mind. Reflection is called infinite because the human mind finds its end in its own activity; and nor just once bur on numberless occasions when ir realizes char it understands some­thing, and recognizes chat it realizes; and when it wants to want something, and wanes what it is wanting itself ro want, and so on by che same reckoning. Herc either one action comes co an end in another ad i11Ji11itum, or the same action is infinitely replicated in itsclP6 
Clearly, then, che intellect is not only incorporeal but immortal 2 too, since it always forms and perfects itself through irself by its own activity, forever understanding and willing. Bur chis is noth­ing other than malcing, or preserving, or continuously renewing it­self, what Sr. Paul called ''che renewal day by day." 37 Hence it never cakes leave of, or is absent from, its perfecter and preserver, since it can never be absent from itself; and hence ir is forever be­ing formed and perfected. 
Moreover, if the goal of natural generation is a sort of immor· 3 tality, a fortiori the goal of intellectual generation is immorrality. Bur because nature produces its progeny outside itself, nature's im­mortality is realized in a succession of births. However, because mind generates internally both itself and other things (insofar as it conceives of the rational principles both of itself and of all ochers when it understands either itself or others), it follows rhar the power to produce chis immortality is preserved in che mind itself as mother. 
A further proof is concealed here. Well-being is superior to 4 simply being. So whoever gives himself well-being is even more ca­pable of giving himself being. Incellecc seems to give itself well­being when it forms and perfects itself both by contemplation and by moral habiruarion. Therefore it can by way of form so give it• self being too that it never ceases to be. Produs says -and I just mention it in passing-that soul, since it is the principle ofgcner• ation, gives birth to and animates itself such that it possesses es­sence from itself. 38 In general, with regard to every indivisible sub• seance existing in its own essence, he affirms chat it both produces and preserves itself; whereas with regard to all divisible substance, even in the case of the heaven itself, he says that it is necessarily produced and preserved by another. But let him look to this argu· ment himself. 
Yet another proof is hidden away here. \Vhen intellect grasps 5 and loves first its own activity and then its own power and sub­stance, without a doubt it is acting on itself, and thus through it• self. For no intermediary is interposed between the intellect and itself. Furthermore, just as the body does not act on itself because it does nor act out of itself, so the intellect, since it does act on it• self. therefore acts, one assumes, out of itself. Ifit acts out ofitself on itself, then it is through itself roo. For if the action's termini are both in it, the middle is too. So what prevents the intellect when it is separated from the body &om acting and living, especially since its activity, which is out of itself, on itself, and accomplished through itself, necessarily is created and located in itseln 
Let me explain chis more clearly. Ifthe activity of mind comes 6 to its proper end in the mind itself, then the mind is in a way the end of its own action. In fact, the beginning and end of each and every object are identical, for all things seek their origin and pro• pose it to themselves as the goal of their motion. So the substance of mind is the beginning of its activity. So it acts through itself, or what our Plato refers to as being moved through itself. 39 As it acts, so it lives, for life is internal activity. So it lives through itself. As it lives, so it exists, for life is the first ace of existence. So it exists similarly through itself. Since it is the cause of itself, what is to prevent it from existing for ever~ And by "cause" I mean not the 
efficient cause but che formal cause, by whose power being is be­
stowed and preserved. 
The life ofqualicy, all of whose activicy flows out into others, is 7 necessarily and narurally deficient in four ways. Firstly, because it wavers in its outpouring, it needs an external support. Secondly, it becomes weak by flowing away. Thirdly, in the process of flowing into ochers, it becomes polluted by external things. Fourthly, as a result of its needing support and of che weakening and the pollu­tion, it will be compelled at some point to ebb away from its own nature. If chat is the case, it follows chat rational life, because it flows back into itself, can sustain itself without being weakened or polluted or ebbing away. Just as the life, which is compelled to flow entirely outside itself, when it departs from life, moves towards and is destroyed by dcach, so the life which flows back into itself grows stronger and is perfected in life. 
Finally, if more abundant motion is che sign of a more abun• 8 dam life, then rational life which deploys all the kinds of movc­menc, bringing them to their completion and goal, also brings to completion all che kinds of life. And hence no absence of life is commingled with it nor any condition liable to death. Elsewhere we have shown chat it deploys every species of motion in the body; chac it brings the models ofall che motions to completion in icsclf; and chat through the mind's reflections it ends all motion in itself and in its own principle. 
: XVI 
Sixteenth proof: bodilyfomr does not possess in.finite force, bm mind does. 
Natural philosophers arc agreed chat bodily form, especially ele• 1 mental form, is subject co such limits that it cannot have any power chat is in any respect infinite and inexhaustible. Bue mind ranges without limit and is never exhausted. To begin with, it is in itself without limit as it wcre,~0 for it understands itself. Thus its understanding, having sec out from the substance itself of mind, circles back to the same point. This circular movement is an infinite movement. For ic does not set out to attain some goal out· side itself in order to rest once it has acquired it; bur it circles round its own substance, cager for itself. But this eagerness for it­self is never stilled. The substance, accordingly, once it has begun out of desire for itself to make contact everywhere with itself and by circling around to gaze everywhere upon itself, then, with the same desire goading it perpetually, of its own choice it likewise perpetually embraces itself. Thus the movement of the inccllecc, because it is circular and revolves upon itself, and seeing chat it is intellectual, is obviously everlasting. 
It also has no end, as we said, precisely because the understand-2 ing is replicated infinitely. For anyone who understands either himself or something else, just as he understands the object, so he is able to understand his understanding, and so on ad i11Ji11it11111, as long as he both knows about the object and realizes chat he knows about ic; and again realizes that he so realizes, and similarly to infinity. The rational appetite which they call the will follows the same course as the understanding. It wants either itself or some­thing else, and it wanes itself co want and then ic wanes to wane, and so on. 
Moreover, the mind divides bodies into a large number of parts 3 and particles ofparrs. le adds numbers to numbers without limit. It discovers the modes or limits of figures, and their murual pro• portions, and also the numberless relationships of numbers. It ev­erywhere limirlcssly extends the line above the heavens. le extends time backwards into the past with no beginning, forwards inro chc fururc with no end. It chinks not only about a rime that is older or lases longer than all ocher rime, but also about a place char is vaster than any other place.~ 1 Ir devises in individual qualities coo num­berless degrees. 
Furthermore, the mind is not satisfied like the sense with one 4 particular class of objects. Ir ranges not only through colors like the sight, not only through sounds like the hearing, but through all things; and by all I mean through those not only that arc bur that were or will be; and nor just those alone, but through all those too chat do not exist, and never did and never will. For it considers many things which could perhaps exist but have never come into being, and it imagines many things which could per• haps never exist ar all. And yet the objects the mind imagines of itself and in itself seem to have as real an existence in che narure of things as chose it fashions in air with the tongue or paints on a wall with the hand. With its own power too and in a particular or­der it is always fashioning anew or renewing the aspects of things. After it has ascended by degrees up through the world's spheres, doesn't it also consider che angels by degrees in such a way chat it always secs one more exalted than another, and never comes upon one so exalted char ic cannot find another at least one degree higher and then another higher by yet another dcgred And it docs this as long as ic declares that each angel is finite, for above any finite spirit ic finds another more sublime. And so it would proceed without end, if it did not impose on itself measure or limit, and conclude that there is an infinite spirit who cxcclls by numberless degrees any angel that exists or can be thought to 
exist. 
Who proceeds to infinity? Who sets a limit in a way to infinite 5 
progress? Who reaches this infinite limit to progressing? Indubita· 
bly the mind does these things. So the power of mind is in a way 
infinite. This is evident too from the fact that it not only discovers 
infinite act, which is God, bur also infinite potency, which is the 
matter subject to God, the matter capable of receiving from Him 
numberless forms. From mind too we learn about generation's 
infinite variousness which can be poured forth through infinite 
time from infinite act into infinite potentiality. 
The same point emerges from the fact that the mind grasps rhe 6 common rational principles of things. But numberless individuals are included under any universal category whether it is a species, or a genus. Mind takes the numberless human beings in the hu­man species in their endless succession, and likewise the infinite individuals in other species, and gathers them up into one species, and gathers the many species into one genus, and the many genera into one essence, and the one essence into the divine unity, truth, and goodness. In rum it then descends step by step from this unity to infinite plurality. It is a wonderful power that restores infinites to something one and something one to infinites. No one degree in nature belongs to the mind exactly in that it penetrates every level from top to bottom.-12 It has no place of its own in that nowhere does it come to rest. It has no power that is, one might say, specific and determined in that it acts on everything alike. 
Demonstrating above all, it seems to me, that the mind's power 7 is as it were undetermined is also its discovery that infinity itself exists, and what it is and of what kind. But since knowledge is perfected through some sort of equating of the mind with the ob­jects known, the mind is equated in a way with the infinity it knows. But what is equated to infinity has to be infinite. If rime, which by a sort of succession measures motion, has to be infinite (given that motion is infinite), then afortiori the mind, which mca· surcs not only morion and rime by means of motionless thought but infinity itself, has to be infinite, since the measure has to be proportionate to what it measures, but no proportion links the finite to the infinite. 
The same point obviously emerges from the face chat in consid-8 crarion mind can proceed from nor-being to being, and the re­verse. But being and nor-being arc separated from each ocher by an immense gulf. Immense indeed has to be the power chat spans chis immense gulf. But who denies char the mind spans it, a) when we understand in terms of very precise rational principles both creation which proceeds from nor-being to being and destruction which does rhe reverse; b} when we describe the nature of these two extremes; and c} when we grasp with the intellect the power of the common being which imparts itself to the things being born from its progression through the numberless modes of being~ 
Finally and to sum up, for us the evidence chat in the mind ex• 9 ists a power char is in a way infinite could be that the body's hun­ger, thirst, and sleep are quickly assuaged and with very liccle, but chat the ardor of the mind is never extinguished whether it looks to things human or divine. If it longs for things human, what hoard of riches, what breadth of empire secs a term for it? If for things divine, by no knowledge ofcreated beings or finite objects is it fulfilled. Deservedly it never rests until it grasps the infinite God who satisfies its infinite capacity, emanating as it does from Him. If the power of the mind were finite it would be satisfied with something finite, or at least its thirst would be quenched. Bue in point of fact in the acquisition of finite objects, not only is it not extinguished but it bums the more fiercely. This is because the more, in knowing more, it approaches the infinite God in a sort of preparation, the more it bums, closer now to its lire, and the more greedily it advances, closest now to the infinite goal of its morion. This indeed is what the element of fire does when it returns to its own sphere. A stone docs the same even more obviously when it falls from on high: the closer it gets to the ground, the more vio• lcndy it hurtles rowards it. 
Who will declare that the mind is an elemental body or some-10 thing corporeal, if it possesses infinite power, the power of persc• vering and grasping and encircling and traversing, whcrher it has this power from itself or, if the truth be known, from a sort of di­vine abundance. This is insofar as the absolute infinity ofGod im­plants in the minds and souls directly dependent on it an infinity of intellect and of life, and continually preserves it and leads it back from the infinite beginning to the infinite end. For if from an absolute quality everywhere there emanates usually some similar imparted quality, is it a wonder that from absolute infinity some• where there flows a similar or like infinity; and that it flows espe• cially into minds and souls, through which, the Platonists believe, the infinite succession of time and generation proceeds in the world too? Who would be such an idiot as to suppose that mind will have some limit to its duration when it has no limit in its power, at least thus augmented, and none in its activity, as though it could have a limit outside itself which it does nor have within it• self? Iflife precedes undemanding in origin, and if understanding exceeds life in value, and if the human soul has been endowed with such dignity that it has been granted in a way an infinite power of understanding and of willing, then ceded to this same soul still earlier and still more muse have been the infinite power ofliving. 

