Chapter l The second sign: from what the reason accomplishes, and from prophecy. 
Chapter 3 The third sign: from purposeful activity in the arcs and in governance. 
Chapter 4 The fourth sign: the evidence from the effect of miracles. 
Chapter ; Six questions about miracles and their resolution. 
Fourteenth Book: That the soul is immortal is proved by twelve properties of God which the soul imitates. 
Chapter t We demonstrate char the soul strives to become God by way of twelve indications or signs corresponding to twelve properties ofGod. 
Chapter l The fifth sign of immortality is that the soul desires the first truth and the first good. 
Chapter 3 Sixth sign: that the rational soul strives co become all things. 
Chapter 4 The seventh and eighth signs: chat rhe rational soul strives to make all things and also to master them. 
Chapter ; The ninth and tench signs: char man longs co be everywhere and to be forever. 
Chapter 6 The eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth signs: chat we long ro attain four powers of God. 
Chapter 7 The fifteenth sign: chat the rational soul seeks riches and pleasure in the highest degree. 
Chapter 8 The sixteenth sign: that we worship ourselves as we worship God. 
Chapter 9 For mankind religion is the most appropriate and truth-celling ofall things. Chapter 10 Three objections by the followers of Lucretius and their resolution. 


BOOK XII 
Many arguments and witnesses proving that the h11man mind is formed in understanding by the divine mind. 
Plato, the father of philosophers, when he is discussing how to ob-1 tain wisdom in his letter co the Syracusans, says char for us co know each thing we mainly need a combination of these five items: name, description, image, formula, and idea.1 Let us use the exam≠ple of the circle as he did to suppose the same of all the rest. Our rational soul is often reminded of its knowledge ofa circle through hearing when it hears the name "circle" or the following descrip≠tion ofa circle: "a circle is a figure that bends back upon itself and is everywhere equidistant from its center." It is reminded too through vision when it sees a circle made out ofwood on a lathe, or painted on a wall: chis is not a true circle, as it is not perfect, but an image or copy of the true. So the rational soul (hungry for truth and roused by the name, description, and image) summons into act the innate formula of a circle from within itself. This for≠mula is like a seal or character that the soul uses to direct its gaze towards the idea itself of the circle blossoming within the divine mind, and this directing is knowledge of the circle. In the letter Plato shows chat a rational soul which is enclosed in the body canï not rise to the idea without ascending these four steps, since, havï ing fallen below its own level long ago, to return to itself it has co first take the initial three steps, and then use the formula which it has within to rise above itself to the idea.l For just as the forms of things arc cast forth from the divine mind into matter by means of the soul's lowest power, that is, via the seeds offorms implanted in the power, so the passage from the perception of bodily forms to the ideas of the divine mind docs not take place except via the highest part of the soul, that is, via the innate formulae of the ideas. The passage is such char the ascent from rhe body's forms, which are entirely temporal because they change both in essence and affective condition, to the forms of rhe divine mind, which arc entirely eternal because no aspect of chem changes, is made via the forms of che human mind, which are partly eternal and partly temporal; and this is because via their essence they are unchanging but via their affective condition they arc turned from habit into act and back again. 

It behooves the craftsman who is going to give form to matter to prepare it himself. Thus the sublime mind, when it is about to give form to our mind daily vb rhc ideas, has prepared our mind earlier for chis forming, and imprinted it with the characters ofthe ideas. As the Prophet [David] sings, "The light of His counte≠nance is upon us, so chat we might see the light in His light."1 By this he means thac the idea catches fire in our mind through the formula struck at the right moment, just as fire is ignited in wood through sulfur, or light illuminates the air thanks to che air's clear and cloudless nature. And because nature's relationship to matter is analogous almost to that of God to His matter, but nature has adorned celestial matter, as some believe, with all the forms only once whereas it is adorning elemental matter at every single mo≠ment, so God probably filled angelic matter, if I may call it that, wirh all che ideas only once too, buc fills ensouled matter daily. The opinion of Avicenna and Algazel seems co be somewhat simi≠lar to this mystery of the Pbtonists. ï For they think that sublunar elemental and intellectual macrer is subject to some divine mind as the form-giver, whose instruments for preparing elemental matter are the corporeal forms; bur when marrer is eventually prepared, this divine mind itself imprints the substantial forms fin it]. Like≠wise, they think, the human mind, having received images of bod≠ics through the senses and the phantasy, is so prepared that ic can turn towards the divine understanding, and insofar as it is turned, it is daily formed. What we call understanding is nothing other than being formed by the divine understanding; and what we call remembering is to have already contracted the habit by which we are turned towards the divine mind easily and at will. Bue let us dismiss the Arabs for the present, though they are quite good friends to Plato, and return to Plato's teachings. 
Plato seems to have persuaded himself that we cannot know 3 anything truly, unless we are formed by the ideas, for the following reasons. First. The word for circle changes. In a different language it can be called differently. Ifso, the description changes too, be≠cause it is compounded of words. The image also changes; for a circle made of wood can be destroyed, and a painted circle erased. The formula too changes in that it passes from habit into act, and from act back again into habit. Bur what is comprehended via knowledge of the circle is completely unchangeable, both because it is universal, and because it cannot be otherwise. Therefore, in order to comprehend the unchangeable reason of a circle, we need an immutable idea. 
Second. A circle produced on a lathe, or painted, is not pure, 4 because it has a certain clement of straightness mingled with it. Likewise the picture in the phantasy, which is the result oflooking at the visible circle, does nor attain the pure rational principle ofa circle, which is totally separate from and opposite to its figure. If the reason listens to the phantasy, it too errs. To see the pure circle it muse therefore have recourse to the pure idea. 
Third. True knowledge of a circle consists in knowing what a 5 circle is. The four steps we are talking about signify quality rather than substance, because they themselves are qualities. 5 
Fourth. The true and perfect mode of knowing follows the 6 mode ofexisting. Just as a circle and the other kinds of object are conceived and brought to birth from the divine mind by means of their ideas, so they appear ro be known by subsequent minds through the same ideas; and the result is that a![ kinds of knowl≠edge will imitate prime knowledge as much as possible. The truth of a created object consists in irs corresponding in every respect with its idea. Bur knowledge mainly consists in the mind being in harmony with the truth. Yet it cannot square with the object's truth, unless it also squares with rhe idea in whose harmony the truth consists, such that the mind knows the object through the idea char is its cause (since true knowledge is via the cause). Hence the rheology ofJohn the Evangelist, which calls the idea the divine reason, also calls chis reason the truth, because through it things truly exist and arc truly known.6 
Fifth. The intellect understands and judges all created objects 7 in terms of their absolute rational principles. And just as most sensible objects readily and naturally present themselves as the same to all chose perceiving them and do not change when the perceivers change, so the intelligible principles always and ev≠erywhere present themselves as the same to those using their rea≠sons, and remain unchanging in themselves, even as the rational souls of those doing the reasoning may be closer ro chem or far≠ther away. Such principles are superior to all created things nor only because through rhcm, as through rules, all created objects arc accepted or rejected, but also because rhey are prior in their amplitude and simpliciry. Hence they arc in God Himself, who uses them to distinguish and arrange individual entities. So when the intellect apprehends such principles, then it apprehends in a way both God in whom chcy exist and the objects whose para≠digms they arc. For in accordance with its particular natural ori≠gin, chc intellect in a way apprehends God (in whom dwell rhc principles) before it apprehends objects (in which the principles do not dwell, though they arc present to them). It should not apï pear unbelievable ro anyone that all corporeal objects are known through their incorporeal paradigms rather than the reverse. For ic 

I I I 
I 
ï BOOK XII ï CHAPTER I ï 
is through the spiritual images of sensible objects, whether they arc in the senses or in mirrors, that we perceive sensible bodies, not vice versa. And is it surprising we arc so deceived in this mac≠tcr that when we look at things' spiritual paradigms we often think we arc gazing only :lt their corporeal natures? For children when they see the bodiless images of bodies in mirrors, and dreamers, when they peruse spiritual images, both believe they are seeing ac≠tual bodies. I will go into this in more detail later. 
To these reasons add cwo further signs, one from the intellect, 8 the other from the will. (First) from the intellect. In acquiring knowledge of a natural species like beaucy, we first think about a description ofbeaucy common to all beautiful objects; then we imï mediately add certain properties of beaucy derived from the de≠scription. We will concede chat we could perhaps ponder these notions by way of a formula of beaucy innate in the mind. Bue when we spend more time in this consideration, we find chat the nature of beaucy, which we have defined, is infinite because it is pure, and, being infinite, is God. Now nobody of right mind would concede chat an infinite nature and God Himself are appre≠hensible through a finite formula existing at an immense, yea an immeasurable, distance beneath God. So the mind, using its own formula brought from habit into ace, is linked co che divine idea in a preparacory way; and thus linked, it rises above itself. For noth≠ing can ever elevate itself above itself, unless it is lifted up by something higher. How does water, for instance, rise into the air unless it is being lifted by the air's heat? Since it is the ray of the idea, the formula itself rebounds co the idea by a narural instinct and with ease, and carries with it the mind into which this ray has been irradiated. Since it is led back co che idea, the ray flows back into it as into a fountain, as a ray is reflected into the sun. And by way of a knot of this kind a single enticy is compounded from the mind and from God. Hence Paul. the divine theologian, declares, "He who is joined co God becomes one spirit."7 

{Now] a sign from the will. The mind in clear knowledge of the 
9 
truth is suffused with such a wonderful pleasure that it exceeds cvï cry measure of human pleasure. The will too desires this srare of life for itself alone, and everything else for its sake, as if chis scare dwelt on the summit of nature and nothing desirable existed be∑ yond it. 
With these arguments and others much like chem Plato seems 10 co have convinced himself chat nothing can truly be learned unless God is the teacher. Thus he says, in the same letter: "Divine mys∑ reries cannot be taught by words. But if someone spends all his time with things divine and tries to live his life in conformity with theirs, suddenly, as from a sparking fire, the light of truth will blaze up in his soul ar last and thereafter nourish itself.''' This, he writes, had happened to himself: and properly so, since in a letter too to King Dionysius he had written that he was devoting all his mind's energy to chc study of things divinc.9 Socrates thought that such a study would at length purge the mind and enable it to achieve whatever it desircd.10 Accordingly, having set aside at some point his usual preoccupation with asking questions, he sought refuge in moral philosophy, with the result that with its aid, havï ing dispelled the clouds of the body, his mind became clearer and was filled suddenly with the light of the divine sun that shines for≠ever and everywhere. Socrates achieved this first himself, and then Plato seems to have done so too by imitating Socrates. Bur let us return to our topic. 
In the seventh book of the Republic, since he had called God 11 goodness itself, Plato adds chat chis goodness can scarcely be perï ceived, but unless it is known nothing is truly known or righdy performed, publicly or privatcly. 11 Aristoxcnus maintains char Soc≠rates and Plato learned this from Indian philosophcrs.'2 And Socï rates put the same notion to Thcages in the dearest terms: only from God can we learn about this or any other matter ( as we disï cussed in the previous book).'3 But in the sixth book of the Rcpub≠

lie."' Plato compares God to the sun {as we explained in the De amore).15 He says that the highest in the class of sensibles is related to our senses and to sensible objects in the same way chat the highest in the class ofintelligibles is related to our intellects and to intelligible objects. The sun procreates eyes to see and colors to be seen. To eyes it gives their generated essence, 16 their power to see, and the ace of seeing (since without light we see nothing in act). To colors again it gives their generated essence, 17 and the power by which they can move the eyes, and the act through which they do move them. In the same way, writes Plato, God provides essence to minds, then the power of understanding, and finally pours in understanding itself. To intelligible objects too He gives essence, the power whereby they can move the mind, and the act through which they move it. Thus God unites the act of mind and the act of intelligible objects, as che sunlight unites the act of the eye and the act of colors. And just as in seeing the act is threefuld-the morion of color, the looking of the eye, the brilliance of the light joining the other two acts together-so in undemanding the act of intelligible objects is called truth by Plato and the acr of mind, knowledge: and the act char knots chem together for Plato is God, who ensures both chat the mind knowingly understands and that the objects are truly understood. Rather, God brings it about char He Himself is understood. 
As John the Evangelise says, the mind of God is "che way, che 12 truth, and the life," and no one comes to God except through it.18 For it is the truth of the objects to be understood; it is the life of the mind that understands; and it is the way by which the ob≠jects flow into the mind and che mind comes into contact with them. Thus he said elsewhere that they alone with whom and in whom God abides can see the spirit of rruth.19 For if good things move the will by reason of goodness, and therefore goodness itself moves the will through goodness to goodness, and we yearn for nothing else bur goodness in particular objects, then it follows, be≠


cause things true move the intellect by reason of truth, that the truth itself moves the intellect through truth to truth itself, and chat the intellect understands nothing else but the truth itself. Bue nobody doubts chat chis goodness and truth arc God. 
Eyes shining with light sec objects shining with lighc by means 13 of a common lighc; cars of an airy nature hear airy objects by means of a common air. Truth-celling minds understand and pro≠claim things true by means of a common truth. Wills char arc good long for things good by means of a common goodness. The eye, illuminated by che light ofthe sun, secs chc colors and shapes of bodies in chat light, in fact secs nothing but the light itself even though it seems to sec different things (since the light pouring into the eye is refulgent with various splendors insofar as it is reflected into the vision from different bodies, and the eye perceives chis light reflected in bodies, but it docs not receive the light at its source). Similarly our mind, illuminated by God's ray, under≠stands in chat ray the rational principles ofall things whose source is God and which themselves are God; and hence through God's light ic understands and knows only the divine light itself. Yet chc mind seems to know different things, because it understands chc light in terms of chc different ideas and principles of things ema≠nating from ic. Bue although we know everything from day to day through God's light and by degrees also perceive che light shining under chis or chat figure in objects, ycc we will not sec the pure light of God, independent of all ideas and utterly infinite at ics source, until we attain chat state of mental purity wherein, in a single glance, we gaze upon char very light refulgent in chc splen≠dor of all chc ideas cogcchcr. It is chcn, says chat glorious messen≠ger of truth, John the Evangelise, chat we shall sec God as He is, because we shall know God as God.20 But now, formed as we arc by chis or char idea, we sec Him as one species or another, al≠
though even in chis life, according to John, theologians arc chil≠dren of God because they arc reformed daily through the divine 

ideas. This series of ideas is called by him the reason of God, chc life of all things, the light of minds and not only of angelic minds, bur of human minds too -ofall human minds I s:1.y, bcc:1.use it so "lightcth every man that cometh inro this world"21 chat whatever each of us understands he understands in and through chat light, although our benighted minds do not comprehend it because they do not realize they sec everything through it. They hear the voice of the divine spirit breaching where it will, but chey do nor know whence th:1.t voice :1.rrives or whither it is departing. 
Since the ancient theologians understood these things, they al-14 ways combined the study of philosophy with religious piety. To stare with, the philosophy of Zoroaster (as Pl:tco testifies) was nothing ocher than wise piety and divine worship.22 The disputa∑ tions of Mercury Trismcgiscus too all begin with prayers and end with sacrificcs.21 The philosophy ofOrpheus and Aglaophcmus is also entirely concerned with praise of the divine. Pythagoras used co start his studies of philosophy with the morning singing of saï cred hymns.24 Not only in spe:tking but in chinking coo Plato t:mghc us in every single matter co begin with God; and he himself always began with God.2s But co return co Pythagoras for a moï ment. When he discovered that che longer side of the triangle he called rhe right-angled triangle has the same value26 as that of the ocher two sides added rogerhcr, he sacrificed a hecatomb in gratiï tude to God, because he understood that nowhere could anything true be seen except in the light of the highest cruch.27 Hence-a final point -Minerva, goddess of wisdom, is imagined as having been born from Jupiter's head alone; and hence coo the verse 
Begin from Jupiter, o Muses: all things arc full ofJupiter.28 

II 
First question: On the ascent to God. How the mind is raised to the divine idea. 
At this juncture three further questions arise. First, how can the 1 mind be raised to the divine idea? Second, why, being in that ele≠vated stare, do we not realize that we are seeing God? Third, how docs God keep pouring this understanding itself into us, as Plato claims in the above? 
For the present let me answer the first question thus. When the 2 phamasy, aroused by some man's shape derived from the sight, is formed by this human image, then the formula of the species man, which was lying concealed in the secret parts of the mind, having received this spark, blazes up; and now it forms in act the mind (or reason's acuity) which it had already formed in habit. This givï ing of form is a sort of ambiguous understanding or the onset of understanding. But when the mind has been sufficiently formed, it is then formed by the idea of man, that is, by the rational principle through which God generates man. Thus the mind through the formula ofman adapts irself to the idea ofman, just as wax which has been shaped by a signer ring when it is carefully fitted to the ring is congruent with its model. This fitting is man's true and dis≠tinct understanding. Hence Plato in his Symposium says that the rational soul, the lover ofdivine beauty, when it attains the divine principles, is no longer giving birch in itself to things' images but to things true: it is nourishing its children and becoming a friend to God, and preeminently becoming immortal. 29 
No one seems to reveal this mystery more lucidly than John the 3 Evangelist. He docs not say, as others are wont to say, char the hu≠man mind when it attains something true secs some true thing bur rather thar it "docs truth,"10 because in actuality it rums out that 

God, who is the truth, is made as it were the form of the mind. For the mind, having put on the idea, then becomes the truth itï self of the thing which has been created by that idea. All those who conremplace do chis. As John says, they receive from the full≠ness of the divine reason, 11 because anyone who truly contemplates the species of an object has already received in himself some one of the ideas whose fullness is the divine reason itself. The mind of che complete theologian he describes as "gold refined by fire." 12 For just as gold is clad with the form offire, and through it grows hot and becomes more refined and lustrous, so che mind clad in the ideas ofche divine mind, through chem waxes bright with the light of truth and blazes up with the fuel ofgoodness. Paul the Aposcle coo tells us chat the mind that contemplates things divine is reï newed every day, 11 and is changed into the same likeness with God, and becomes one spirit with Him.34 Trismegisrus similarly says chat from pure mind and divinity there coalesces in a way one spirit.15 And all Placonists support the view that, in the concemï plation ofrational principles, the divine reason is "couched"16 by a substantial, not just by an imaginary, couching of the mind; and chat che unity proper to the mind is joined to God, the unity ofall things, in a manner beyond our conception. Plato often confirms chis in the Phaedrus and the Epinomis and elsewhere, and particu≠larly when he says in the Phaedrus that the concemplator ofthings divine is set apart from other men and totally purified, and char he cleaves to God and is filled with God; and in the Epinomis, chat the rational soul. made perfect by contemplation, emerges wholly uniï fied in che presence of the divine unity.37 He expresses the same view in the &public. 
III 
Second question: Why in this state we do not realize that we are seeing God. 
We can respond to the second question in the following way. Just 1 as the eye, given form by the species of color, secs color, but docs not perceive the species through which it secs, so perhaps the inï tcllect, formed in a way by the idea, immediately understands via the idea a natural species that was created through the idea. Nev≠ertheless it does not yet intuit the idea clearly, or rather, it does not recognize it although it intuits it. This may be what happens in the early stages of contemplating and matching itself to the idea. Bue when the intellect pursues its contemplation and becomes more and more like the idea, it also receives and recognizes it more clearly; but in receiving it it still docs not sec it distinctly. For just as children, when they see their shapes in the sunlight on the sur≠face of water, suppose they arc looking at them in the water's depths, not in the light above, so the still untutored mind, when it sees things' rational principles in God on high, supposes that it is looking at them in itself or in ocher things. This is especially since the principle of a natural clement in God-say the principle of air-does not refer to God simply as God, that is, as the free and absolute principle of the universe, but as the paradigm ofair. Conï sequently the mind, when it is overwhelmed by the rational princiï pie ofdivine air, understands God not as God but as air; for it sees God as air-like, that is, as circumscribed by the nature of air. But angels, who are formed by all the ideas simultaneously, perceive the fount of universal nature through the assembling itself of all the ideas. Thus they insinuate themselves into the divine substance, not just into a part ofit as we do, but virtually into the whole of it. Accordingly, when they see the ideas, they recognize them. 


This will happen co us too when we have been completely re≠
2 
formed in God. The mistake we arc making is almost due ofordi≠nary folk, who look at the moon in rhc middle of the night and declare char they arc seeing by rhc moon's light when in fact they arc seeing by the sun's light even at night. Like them, ungrateful men claim that they sec things true by their own natural light when they arc seeing them by a lighr char is universal and divine. If the sun's circle never rose and set, or we never looked up at it and saw its shape, no one would know whence the light by which we sec all things is dispatched into the air, just as nobody now knows whence the light by which we distinguish all things is sent into the mind, because God from whom the light descends is hid≠den from us. It descends in such a way that it is the beginning, middle, and end ofour understanding. The divine light is the be≠ginning, because just as the eye's vision is caused by an external light as by a universal cause and by an inner spark ignited by chat light as by a particular cause, so che act of understanding in us de≠pends both on God's mind in all its amplitude and on our mind. The lighr is the middle or mean, because in it we descry chc eter≠nal principles that exist only in eternity. And it is the end, because we know only it; for each thing's eternal principle in that eternity is in its essence nothing bur char eternity. 
Herc is revealed char sacred mystery which our Plato writes 3 about in the seventh book of the Republic.38 The theologian, he says, ascends by way of the appropriate fundamental principles and seeps of demonstration up to the universe's first principle, couches it, and dings co it, always cleaving co chose things which cleave to the first principle. For he docs nor climb towards it on rhe corporeal rungs of sensible bodies, bur rather depends on forms themselves to ascend through forms cowards forms, until he reaches the form char is the goal of the universe. The following is a brief intcrprcrarion of these words. 

from bodily affections, separates the reason from the deceptive conjectures [occasioned by] sensible things, and invites the mind co climb by such steps towards che truth: to climb a) on forms, that is, on the formulae inherent in the mind from its origin; b) through forms, rhac is, through d1e forming which comes to us from che ideas; and c) towards forms, that is, cowards the ideas themselves and the forms for considering natural entities. These forms cleave to God, Plato says, the first principle of the universe; for God is the source of the ideas. The theologian's mind cleaves to chem, that is, insinuates itself into chem in order to be formed by chem; and through this insinuation, he says, it touches God, is formed in ocher words by che divine mind. Plato added char it also holds on to God. For two reasons in my opinion. First because once it has thus starred, rhe theologian's mind never perhaps com≠pletely abandons the state of such a life; and second because, after our mind has already been formed by the divine mind after long contemplation and in many respects, it begins to know superhu≠manly to the extent it is no longer unaware char it is itself contemï plating God through God and in God. 
Plato calls God by many names: first principle, end, and form: 5 first principle, because everything comes from Him, and because understanding rakes its origin from Him; end, because under≠standing and everything else reach their end in reaching Him; and form, a) because God Himself is the ace which both forms and produces all things as they proceed from Him as their first princi≠ple, and reforms and perfects these same things as they turn back cowards Him as their end; and b) because each mind is formed by Him when it understands the truth. Plato added a fourth name for God: the good itself, or goodness itself. TI1e property of the good is to diffuse itself, to attract things, and to perfect them. God diffuses Himself in creating things, attracts them in converting chem [to Himself), and perfects chem by forming chem as they is≠sue forth, and by reforming them when they have been converted. Plato puts the good itself above mind and essence. He puts it above mind, that is, above what exists as the invisible eye receptive of truth and hungry for goodness; for God cannot be said to be re≠ceptive of truth or desirous of goodness. Rather He is truth and goodness itself, although He can be called mind in a more exalted sense, both because the divine truth is not ignorant of itself, and because minds issue in mukirudes &om an overflowing of the di≠vine goodness. God is also set above chat essence which is the sub≠ject of being, and, moreover, He is set above char being which is the act of essence. For such an act, since it is mixed with passive potentiality, is impure and finite. Yet God is called ..being" by the Peripatetics insofar as He is that pure and absolute act via which all essences receive the act of being. 
Plotinus39 and Proclus,ç0 however, offer the following reasons 6 for setting the one itself and the good above being. The influence of the one and the good extends far beyond that of being, because matter and unformed potency must be said to participate more in the one and the good than in being. For being comes about through form, but matter is without form, yet is said co be one and desirous of the good. (They appear to have accepted this arï gument &om Dionysius the Areopagice.41 ) Furthermore, just as che many and nothingness are not the same, so being and the one arc nor the same. And you cannot arrange them side-by-side, put≠ting being here and the one there, otherwise you would be fool≠ishly positing two universal principles. Nor can you put being above the one, since the one would then participate in being, and not become a bigger one but two, that is, become the one and be≠ing simultaneously. It follows, then that the one is above being. Lastly, insofar as unity signifies something simpler than being which embraces both essence and existence, it accords chat much more with the universal first principle. Plotinus and Produs do nor allow existence and essence to be separated anywhere lest a proper act should ever be separated from its proper potentiality. They do not want it to appear odd to anyone that they call the universal principle unity. For they distinguish rims. It must be called either unity, or multiplicity, or a composite of the rwo. It cannot be a composite lest what makes different things one har∑ mony be forced to depend on that composite. Itcannot be a multi≠plicity without unity, because it would lack omniporency and d1e universe would lack all unity. But omnipotency must be present in the universal first principle. So, if chis were multiplicity itself, then the more things declined into multiplicity, the more powerful they would turn our to be. But since things become more powerful me closer mey approach to unity, and the reverse, it follows char the universal first principle has to be called, properly speaking, unity. Finally, since individual objects are properly created and preserved by a certain unity, isn't it obvious that unity itself is the cause mat creates and preserves all things? 

Again, all things seek the good absolutely but not being absoï 7 lutely, just well-being. It may even be che case that if rhey cannot have well-being completely, they do not want being at all, as Olympiodorus maintains,~1 in chat what wants being wants it for the sake of the good. The good then, since it is the ultimate end, is certainly the universal first principle. If it exists above being, a fortiori it exists above life and mind. But when mey speak of the one and me good, mcy always mean the same thing. For as well≠being in me order of things consists of unity, since evil is continï gent on dissension and division, so above the universal order the one itself and the good arc identical. Its splendor is beauty, which is nothing other than the refulgence of the rational order of the many forms in the mind, rhe soul, nature, and matter. Bur above this beauty, they contend, is me one, since beauty is composite. Above beauty too is the good, because all things always desire the good, bur only those things char know beauty desire be:mty, and only after they have known it. Again, we desire beauty for the sake ofthe good, hoping it will profit us. Finally, we desire truly to pos≠sess the good, yet it suffices for us often if we just appear co pos≠sess beauty. 

Happy indeed arc those whom the universe's beauty, that is, the 8 splendor of the good itself, transforms by love into the good itself, especially since in transforming them into the good, chis beauty re≠forms them equally into the one, and in the one unites them to the good itself. For the one itself and che good arc identical: they exï tend alike through and above and below all things, and they arc sought alike by all things through a natural desire even if they lack cognition. They cannot differ among themselves like two particu≠lar things equally disposed, lest there be nvo first principles. Nor can the one be superior to the good, lest something were said to be better and more desirable than the good. Nor again is the good above the one, lest what is called the good were to cease being the good. Therefore the one and the good are completely identical, since they arc equally desired; similarly disunity and evil, being identical, are equally shunned. 
Happy is chc man who is totally united co the good. But prop∑ 9 crly speaking he is not united by the intellect's power. For chis power, since it is multiple and located beneath the intelligible, docs not accord with unity, nor can it attain co what cowers over the in≠telligible, chat is, to universal being. Moreover, since the one and good is desired by an instinct prior co understanding, so is it achieved by a kind ofcouching superior co understanding, a unify≠ing contact if I may call it such. This comes about through our own unity, which is superior to understanding and which links the soul itself co the universal unity and goodness, not with the imageï linked bond ofunderstanding, but with the true substantial union itself. And the result is not a trivial or external or particular de≠light, as of someone (merelyJ watching or hearing the good, but rather a vehement, inner, and universal pleasure, as of a taste or couch superior to the intellect, of someone already fully casting and touching the sweetness that is superior to the intelligible. Our natural thirst desires (this] liquor before we recognize through the sense that we arc thirsty; and after we have recognized ir, we de≠sire it again. The appetite consequent on rhc sense is image-linked and far distant from our substance, but the appetite preceding it is deep within our substance. Thus when we succeed in tasting rhc liquor, we do so properly by virtue nor of the later [pose-cognitive] appetite bur of the earlier (pre-cognitive) one, and we arc trans≠formed perfectly into our substance. Similarly, it is not so much rhe succeeding appetite as the appetite preceding the action of the mind, which, as che motion's principle, enjoys the motion's end as long as it effects the substantial bond and so alone wholly satisfies rhe yearning. 

IV : 
TI,ird question: How God continually pours understanding into us. 
Let us now proceed to the third question. To my mind, what r Plato means when he says that knowledge is poured inro rhe intel≠lect and truth into intelligible objects by the good itself is that the beneficent and life-giving act of all things, which is God, always encircles its works, implanting itself in chem all. Bue principally, it shines in the secret parts of the mind: it continually purifies, sharpens, illuminates, and secs fire co rhe mind's vision. It also gives life to the formulae innate in rhe mind such chat whenever we apply our soul co rhe search for truth, having emptied ourselves of cares, the formulae, made more alive by the life-giving God, sally forth into the open with greater eagerness; and the mind at its most acute and fired by the rays char scream from God regards che formulae with greater clarity and ardor. In chc ace of under≠standing, God aces as chc prime and universal agent, chc formula as the particular and secondary agcnc, and chc image as rhe stimu≠lant; the mind plays the role of matter. 

Let us consider chis by turning to an example, so we may sec 2 more clearly how chc act of understanding descends co us from God. If God in creating attunes our mind ro the idea of the creat≠ing mind flourishing within Him and models it very closely on Himself, and if from a lyre the motion and sound pass over to an≠other lyre similarly tuned, why is it surprising that in understand≠ing the mind of man is in tune with the sound of rhe divine mind~ A craftsman makes a thousand mirrors. Having made and ar≠ranged chem in order he stands in front of chem. A thousand im≠ages of the craftsman arc reflected in chc thousand mirrors. The craftsman moves himself ac a particular moment in such a way as to turn his eye towards the rest of his body's parts so chat he can examine them, and co turn the pares, as well as he can, cowards his eye. Reflections copy these movements in the mirrors. All the re≠flected eyes move to rhe motion of the living eye, the reflected parts to the motion of the living parts. Similarly God creates souls, then places Himself in front of chem, as though they were mirrors; in chis way reflections of God arc formed in individuals. These reflections arc souls' minds such chat they are both many, because the souls are many in which they dwell, and yet collec≠tively one since it is one God to whom they refer. Bue through its power of understanding each mind refers to the power of God that conceives the ideas, but through its formulae ic refers to the ideas themselves. Hence the prophetic saying we mentioned above, "The light of chy countenance, 0 Lord, is stamped upon us" and "In thy light shall we see lighc."41 
Through His creative power with which by distinguishing be-3 tween them He conceives the ideas, God gives the mind enduring power to attain che ideas in understanding. Again, God uses the ideas, once they have been conceived and arc rationally distinct, to impress the ideas' formulae enduringly on the mind. To God's movement -to God's ace, char is-corresponds a continuous movement in the minds. How? The power in God char conceives chc ideas turns in a way cowards chc ideas themselves and in reï turn the ideas turn cowards this power. Meanwhile, because of a particular accord and attuning, it happens chat rhc power of unï demanding in man's mind, ifit has been freed and raised towards God, rums itself cowards the formulae, and the formulae arc turned towards the power of understanding. Thus the aces of the mind continually imitate the aces of God in a marvelous accord. Bur since the face in the mirror, when it appears to sec the face whose reflection it is, does not really sec bur is being seen, so Paul the Aposclc says: "Afi:cr that ye have known God, or rather arc known of God."~4 Thus the higher countenance of our soul is called by the Platonists an imitation of the divine countenance. Plorinus, Theodore of Asine, and Iamblichusis go so far as to claim char the mind of man, which is not human but divine, lives in the intelligible world and operates unceasingly through the unceasing contemplation of the ideas. Two main reasons led Plorinus, Theodore, and Iamblichus co this conclusion. 

First. The soul's highest mind, being in itself an intellectual cs-4 sence, understands through its essence, just as fire heats through its essence or water chills, though the soul's power inferior to the mind does not understand through its essence. Just as fire always hears, therefore, so mind always understands. Bur the objects of understanding arc things' eternal species. In understanding, the inï rellecr does not attach itself to the deceptive images ofobjects, but to understand truly it is united with the objects themselves. So the mind is always united with the eternal species, whence it eagerly dwells in the house of eternity. That is the point of lamblichus' remark: "The being of our intellect is nothing other than the unï derstanding of powers divinc."46 He supposes chat just as the sun illuminates the moon in the same act whereby the moon is illumi≠nated and with che likeness of light looks to the sun, so the divine mind creates and illuminates our mind in the same act whereby our mind is created and illuminated by it and converted with a natural gaze cowards it. Similarly, in a mirror the reflection gazes back at the face in the same act as the face gazes at it: as it is made by gazing, so is it preserved by gazing back. The soul is an image of God in the same way. 

The second reason is this. The rational soul is created by che 5 divine mind and joined to che body and occupies the mean be≠tween mind and body. If it were only attached to mind, it would not give life to body. If it were only attached to body, it would un≠derstand nothing. Therefore it must be attached co mind and body together, as a line that simulcaneously touches both center and cir≠cumference, or as che sunlight char is united with the sun but ac the same time diffused through rhe air. Mind stands in the same relationship to the rational soul as the rational soul to body. But the corporeal life is nothing other than the continuous act of the soul transmitted to this body's temperament without departing from the soul. So the intellectual life of the soul is nothing other than the everlasting act of che divine intellect attached to the soul but not separated from God. As the soul plants seeds for generarï ing things in che corporeal life, so God lights the sparks for under≠standing in the soul. The corporeal life is che image of the rational soul, but the soul's intellectual life is the image of che divine life and mind. The soul's lowest part, which is the power of nourish≠ment, presides over the corporeal life. If this lowest part which is joined to the body is always active, and acts in a way through its own being, then a fortiori the highest power, which is the more 
powerful since ic cleaves che more closely to its source, is always ac≠tive and acts in a way through its own being. It acts wich regard to mind from which it immediately issues. For only mind flows from mind. Bue mind, which is above us, being pure intellect, feeds on 

the pure intelligible, that is, takes delight in the pure truth. Our mind eagerly shares the same feast if it reclines at the banqueting table of the higher mind. And we have good reason to locate csï scntial and everlasting understanding in the soul. For it dwells in the soul. because it is in harmony with the everlasting causes ofits essence. Just as an everlasting and essential desire for good is in≠nate in the soul, so too is a natural and everlasting vision of the truth, or rather a kind of touching, to use Iamblichus' words,47 a touching which is prior to and more outstanding than all knowl≠edge and argumentation. The divine Iamblichus supported this view with the additional argument that, just as we reach things temporal and contingent through knowledge which is temporal and contingent, so we have to attain things necessary and everlast≠ing through a knowing which is necessary and everlasting, and this precedes our inquiringjust as rest precedes morion. But temporal knowledge succeeds inquiring just as a contingent effect succeeds motion and cime.48 Bur they [the Platonistsn believe chat the di≠vine act itself of mind, which results from a certain viewing or touching of things divine, is not in itself interrupted because ofinï 
ferior actions, even though it is interrupted, insofar as it pertains to our own awareness, in the lower powers, and though the acts of the rational intellect (or of the intellecrual reason) resulting from discursive reasoning are usually interrupted because ofinferior opï erations and vice versa. 
Yet why arc we not aware of the wondrous spectacle of char di-6 vine mind which is ours? Perhaps it is either because, given that we arc continually used to seeing it, we have lost rhc habit ofad≠miring and noticing it, or because the intermediary faculties of the soul, the reason, and the phantasy, being for the most part more involved in life's daily affairs, do not clearly view the works of the divine mind. The like happens when the eye sees something in front of it but when the phancasy, being preoccupied with other things, does not recognize what the eye may see. Bur when the inï 

tcrmcdiary powers arc in repose, the sparks of that intellectual contemplation dart down into them as into a mirror. Thus from true understanding is born true reasoning, and from divine underï standing, human understanding. Nor is it surprising that some∑ thing can come to be in that divine mind that we do not sec. For we notice nothing except what passes through the intermediary powers. Although our power of desiring may hunger or thirst, we do not therefore notice it until the "intention" of such a passion crosses over into the phantasy. Isn't our power of nutrition continï ually at work? And yet we do not pass judgment on its continual action. Hence we do not pass judgment on the mind's perpetual understanding, and yet, far from being any weaker because we do not recognize that it understands, it is stronger. For when we arc singing or running, we often do not think about the fact that we arc singing and running, and accordingly perform these actions more adroitly. For awareness ofan action distracts the soul's intcnï tion and detracts from the action. 
Novices in some craft cannot perform the works of this craft 7 without paying attention, whereas veterans can do so, even if they arc not paying attention, out of a particular habit or nacurc as it were.49 What stops the mind's understanding from being simiï larly continuous? Since one light joined to another light combines without confusion into one light (for they arc both present cvï crywhcre and neither can be distinguished from the other), conseï quently men's minds joined ro the divine mind arc united in a way with the divine mind and united together, and yet they are noc mutually confused. Analogously, the many lines, having returned from the circumference to the center, through cheir points touch the midpoint of che circle; and there the point ofeach line is made one in a way with the midpoint of the circle. The individual points arc also made one in a way with each other, and though neither position nor time distinguishes chem, the reason docs. In the same way, a very large number ofconcepts in the mind can be combined 

ï BOOK XII ï CHAPTER IV ∑ 
both with each other and with che mind without any confusion. As che lesser spheres within the greater sphere touch with their centers the center of che greater, so minds-which arc as it were the lesser spheres of che intelligible world included under the di≠vine goodness as under the greater sphere, and under it having re≠volved by way of their own centers, that is, their own unities which are superior co their intellects-so minds, I say, link them≠selves co the divine unity as co chc center of the universe. Ifchc cir≠cles arc perchance disjoined, so arc che centers too, for they were united together, not confused. Plocinus claims char they will never disjoin, lest the mind's eternal spheres were to remain less united to their highest sphere chan the visible world's temporal spheres to its greater sphere.so Bue chis is Plocinus' concern. Let us return co our theme. 
From all we have imbibed from the springs of Plato and Pio-8 cinus we conclude chat the mind of man is prepared in its under≠standing for the divine mind almost as matter is prepared for form. Ifour mind is formed daily by the ideas of the divine mind, and docs its own work through chem, isn't it obvious char our mind is subject co the divine mind as matter is to form, and stands in the same relationship to che divine forms as prime matter to natural forms~ Hence it should nor be any less immortal than prime matter, especially because, co the degree mind is purer and simpler than bodies or souls and hence more unitary than chem, so che bond that comes about from the meeting of these two minds is co chat degree righter than the bond that usually results either from various corporeal things being mixed together, or from two souls meeting, or from a soul accompanying a body. The screngch ofthis bond is the greater because God is unity itself and goodness itself. Since through the power of unity the knot of all things is tied as one, and since coo through the power ofgoodness attraction and union are everywhere effected, nowhere docs truer union emerge than where mind is in harmony with divinity. 

Again, if God Rows down into mind which emanates immediately and perpetually from Him, and fills it inw:irdly with the infinite fineness of His purity and abundancly with the abundance of His power; and if like a tendon51 for the joints He Himself joins the parts of mind within to c:ich other and to the whole, and tics the whole essence like an inner knot co existence and so is more interï nal to mind than mind to itself-then is ir any surprise char like a form God is united to mind in its understanding, since far more than a form He is already united to mind in its essence and life? 
The principal evidence of this greatest of unions is chat the in-9 nermost substance of a thing is always examined by way of true understanding, because the understanding has penetrated more deeply into the idea of chat thing than the sight into the form of color, or the phantasy into the image of color, since sense and phantasy touch only upon the surface of things. Hence Mercury says that from the harmony ofdivinity and mind coalesces a single spirit.Sl And the theology ofJohn reaches us char the contempla≠tors of the divine reason arc [eventually) as consummately united to it as it is united to God.53 
If the union that occurs in che class of corporeal entities is so 10 dose char matter, which is their lowest limit, is m:ide one not only with all the mean points bur with the highest point ofthe class of bodies, then who will deny that at least an equivalent union occurs in the class of intellectual entities, such chat the human mind, in spire ofbeing their lowest limit, is yet made one with all che inrcl≠lectual forms and even with the highest form? However no third sort of nature is made from che soul and God by some chird agent compounding chem together and directing them both cowards a third act, as is the case in the compounding of natural objects. For in rhe contemplating soul, since God is both the prime mover and the ultimate giver of form, so (its] whole act is God, and God Himself is always in this acr, and the soul becomes, at least at some point in time, divine. And just as nature transmits the order of the forms co matter by means of natural movement, so God transmits the transparent possession of che forms co mind by means of divine and immortal life. The rcsulc is chat divine and immortal life accords with mind just as the understanding of things divine and immortal accords with it. And just as matter, though it flows under che lower forms, yet always comes to rest (some bclieve5~) under the higher forms, so the mind of man, 


though it flows through the sensible and imaginary forms, yet is able at some point in time to come to rest in eternity under the divine forms. le is only able to do chis according to Plorinus, Iamblichus, and Theodore,55 because just as quantity's unlimited extension always perfects matter, so the immeasurable power of the divine abundance perfects mind. Through the force of this power and in its light and to its end mind is formed unceasingly by the eternal ideas. And because all forming is effected through coming into accord, the subject chat is continually formed by the eternal ideas cannot be mortal. The prime matter into which cerï tain eternal forms penetrate is incorruptible, although it docs not itself penetrate chem. Surely chat mind too will be immortal which is not only penetrated by the forms, but which in coming to know chem penetrates chem, and in knowing chem is reflected into them~ 56 
Furthermore, the prime mind is there where the prime life is, 11 for the mind is the turning back of chat life towards the one being. And where the prime life is the prime being is, for life is the first and innermost movement of being itself. Certainly, according as God exists through Himself (and as chat which truly exists enï dures forever), among many He is called the prime being. Accord≠ing as He never succumbs to idleness, but is unceasingly active within Himself. He is called life. According as such an act never flows out ofitself but flows back into itself, He is called mind. For in chat turning back He is conscious of Himself. Since what is highest in some genus has no part of a contrary genus either 

mixed in with it or close to it, accordingly the prime mind suffers nothing mindless in or near itself; the prime life, nothing mortal; the prime being, nothing that is about to rumble into non-being; the prime unity, nothing divisible; and the prime goodness, noth≠ing subject to malady. Thus mind is joined to the prime mind, and just as it retains nothing mindless in chis union, so by the same toï ken it admits nothing mortal or dissoluble or subject to disease. For it is linked through the prime mind also to the prime life and the prime being, and likewise to the prime unity and goodness. Is it surprising if the intellectual life because of its union with the prime life remains immortal, when heavenly bodies, according to the Placonists, though in themselves liable to dissolution because they are mobile and composed from many natures or parts, yet re∑ main without dissolution precisely because they are linked without any other intervening body co immortal soul. But those linked through another medium suffer dissolution, for example, bodies composed of many clements; and these, as the Magi tell us, receive an immortal soul only by way of a heavenly body.s7 
V : 
The first confirmation of the previous argument: by way ofsight. 
When Plato treated of the transmigration of men's souls from 1 bodies to bodies and their recalling the skills of an earlier life in later lives, he did not present his own view but that of certain Egyptians, a view that Augustine condemned.58 However, that man's soul comes down stamped with the forms of things by the Giver of form Himself, chat it does not adequately comprehend things' substances by means of these scamped forms, but chat through them as by way of preparation, having been re-formed by the ideas, it can comprehend-all chis it seems Plaro often stated as his own view, and Augustine fully confirmed it. So treading in Augustine's footsteps, let us seek confirmation once more of our earlier argument. Let us proceed by way of three paths: by way of sight, of hearing, and of reason. 


First via the sense of sight. 111e soul that animates bodies is 2 more powerful than all bodies because ic gives life co bodies. More excellent than this is che soul chat possesses sense. "But more out≠standing still is something in man's rational soul, not, I say, chat it senses sensibles, but that it makes judgments about them. For it is easy to sec chat what docs che judging is superior co what is being judged and docs not judge. But rational life makes judgments, nor only about sensibles, but also about the senses themselves -why an oar has to look bent in the water when it is in fact straight, and why the eyes have to see it thus. For the eyes' vision can report the information, but not judge in any way. Therefore rational life is superior to sensual life."59 
"Thus, ifreason judges on its own, no nature is higher. But be-3 cause reason is clearly liable to change -sometimes we find it has had experience, sometimes not, and it makes the better judgments the greater its degree of experience, and its degree of experience depends on how far it has participated in some skill or learned discipline or wisdom -and because chis is so, we must inquire into the nature of art itself. Now I am not talking here about an art that is picked up by experiencing, but about the one chat is tracked down by reasoning,"60 
"But we should certainly ask ourselves in the case of two win-4 dows set side by side and not one above the ocher, why ir bothers us if one is bigger or smaller when rhey could be equal, whereas, if the windows are one on cop of rhe other, and one is twice the size of the other, the difference docs not bother us. Or again why, with two such, we do nor really care how much bigger or smaller one of them is, but with three, our sense itself seems to demand clut ei≠ther they should be equal, or char the one in between should meaï sure halfway between the biggest and the smallest. To begin with, one could say that Nature herself gives advice on what should be approved. We should, however, be careful to note cl1at, as with something which causes no displeasure when we first sec it, but which we reject when we compare it with something better, so we discover chat art in chc vulgar sense is nothing else but the mcmï ory of things we have tested and approved in conjunction with some use of the body and its activity. If you lack all chis, you can still judge the results; and chis is a far superior activity, even though you arc unable to make the artifuccs."61 


"Since it is symmetry chat gives pleasure in all the arcs, and all 5 things are beautiful if this is preserved intact, but since symmetry itself desires equality and unity, either in the likeness of equal parts or in the proportion between unequal parts, rhcn who can find the highest equality or likeness in bodies? And who dares say, having given chc matter careful consideration, that any body can be truly and simply one, since all bodies change by moving either from one species to another, or from one location to another, and are constituted of parts occupying their own places and thus spaï tially distributed? Furthermore, true equality and likeness, and true and prime unity arc not themselves perceived by the sense, but by chc mind's understanding. For whence would our desire for some kind of equality in bodies derive, and how would we be con≠vinced it differs so very much from perfect equality, if our mind had not seen perfect cquality~"62 
"Since all which arc beautiful in terms of che senses ( whether 6 produced by nature or elaborated by art) arc beautiful in rime and space, like body and the movements of body, so the equality and unity known only to mind (according co which we judge the corï poreal beauty brought to us by way of the senses) is neither ex≠tended in space nor unstable in time. le cannot be correct to say that we use this equality to judge the roundness of a temple, but not the roundness of a vase or a silver coin. Likewise with times and with the movements of bodies, it would be ridiculous to say that we use equality to judge the cqualness of years, but not that of months. Whenever something is consistently moved, how≠ever, whether through these larger intervals or through hours or through still briefer moments, it is judged by one and the same unchanging equality. But if the lesser and greater dimensions of figures and motions arc judged by the same law ofequality or like≠ness or congruity, then the law itself must be greater than all of them. But it is greater in power, since in extent of time and place it is neither larger nor smaller; for were it larger we could nor use rhe whole of it to judge what is smaller; and were it smaller, we could not use the whole of it to judge what is larger. In point of fact, however, since we use the whole law of "squareness" to judge a fo. rum square and a stone square, and likewise if we use the whole law of equality ro judge that the feet of a scurrying ant arc coordi≠nated, and use the same law for a lumbering elephant, who will doubt chat this law is neither larger nor smaller in terms ofthe inï tervals ofspace or rime, even though it is superior to everything in power~ But since this law which applies to all the arcs is totally imï mutable, whereas the human mind which is permitted to observe this law can be subject to the mutability of error, it is quite appar∑ enc char above our mind exists the law called truth."63 


"We should no longer doubt that chis unchanging nature ( i.e. 7 truth] which is above the rational soul is God, and that the prime life and the prime essence dwell where the prime wisdom is. For this is that unchanging truth, which is properly called both the law of all the arts and the arc of the omnipotent artificer. Therefore, since the soul realizes that it does not judge the species and mo≠rion of bodies according to itself, it ought at the same rime to recï ognize that, while its nature is superior to the nature of the object it is judging, the nature according to which it judges and about which it can make no judgment is superior to it. For I can say why on either side ofany one body the members should correspond to each other: it is because I am delighted by the highest equality, which I sec not with my eyes but with my mind. So I judge char the things I see with my eyes are better to the extent chat they are closer (as fur as their nature permits) to the things I understand in my rational soul. Bue why these [in rum] arc the way they arc, no man can say; nor can anyone claim in all seriousness that they have to be like this (as if they could be otherwise)."~ 


"\Vhy they give us pleasure, or why we love them so intensely 8 when we understand them better, this too no one, if he properly understands chem, will dare to say. Just as we and all rational souls make correct judgments about inferior things according to the truth, so truth itself alone makes judgments about us when we ad≠here co it. And not even the Father judges the truth; for it is no less than He; and so what the Father judges, He judges through the truth. For all chat desire unity has this as its measure or form or exemplar, since truth alone cook on the full likeness of Him whence it had its being."65 
"The mind judges all things because it is above all things when 9 it is with God. And it is with God when it understands most purely and loves what it understands in coral charity. Thus, insofar as it can, it too becomes the law itself whereby it judges all things, and about which none can judge. Similarly with temporal laws: al≠though men make judgments about them when they institute chem, once they have been instituted and established, the judge is not going to be permitted to make judgments about them but only through them. Yet the establisher of temporal laws, if he is a good and wise man, looks to chat eternal law, concerning which no soul is allowed to judge, so chat he may learn through its immutable principles what should or should not be permitted in the world of time. So pure souls are permitted to acknowledge the eternal law but not to judge it.''66 


"We can of course use this law to make judgments about the JO rational soul or body: [ for instance J that the soul is less busy or less vehement than it should be, or the body less clear-complex≠ioned than it should be. But no one makes judgments in any way about the law itself. When someone says rhat things eternal arc more powerful than things temporal, or that seven and three make ten, he is not declaring that they should be so, but only that this is the reality. In this recognition he is not an examiner who corrects, bur someone who is delighted by what he finds."67 
"For many people, however, human delight is the goal; they do 11 not want to aim at higher things in order to judge why the sensible objects here give delight. Thus, if I ask a builder who has built one arch why he is laboring to erect another one like it on the opposite side, he will answer, I imagine, chat equal pares ofthe construction should correspond to each other. If I go on to ask him why he chooses to do it in this way, he will say that it looks correct, that it is beautiful, that it gives pleasure to chose who see it. He will not venture further. He is content to rely on his eyes and docs not un≠derstand the source of his dependency. Bur with a man who has eyes within and secs what is invisible, I shall nor cease reminding him why it is chat these pleasures please him, in order that he may venture to be the judge of human pleasure itself. For he is set above it and is not possessed by it when he judges it itself and does not simply judge through it. First I shall ask him whether things are beautiful because they give pleasure, or give pleasure be≠cause they are beautiful. He will answer me, with no hesitation, that they give pleasure because they arc beautiful. Then I shall ask him why they are beautiful, and, if he falters, then ask him whether it is because the pares arc alike and joined in some union for one harmony's sakc."68 
"When he realizes that chis is so, I shall ask him whether rhcy 12 fully achieve this unity we have shown they desire, or whether chey fall far shore of it, and, so to speak, pretend co possess ir. Now if 
71 


this is so -for who cannot sec, once alerted, that there is no form and no body at all which docs not have some trace of unity, but that no body, however beautiful, because inevitably it is different in different parts ofspace, can attain the unity it seeks-I shall inï sist that he cell me where he himself secs the unity and from what source he secs it. Were he unable to sec this unity, then how would he know both what the bodies' form is imitating and why it cannot achieve it? Now when you say to the bodies, 'Unless some unity contained you, you would not exist; but if on the other hand you were unity itself, you would not be bodies,' you are telling chem what is true. Whence, therefore, do you come to know the unity according to which you judge bodies? Ifyou have not seen it, you cannot judge that bodies fail co achieve it. But if you have seen it with these bodily eyes, you would not be saying truthfully that, though bodies arc onto its track. yet they are a long way from it. 
For with these eyes you only see things corporeal. So we must see this unity with the mind. But where do we see it? If it were in the same place where our body is, somebody in the East making judg≠ments about bodies in this way would be unable to sec it. So it cannot be confined to this location here. And since it is present wherever someone is makingjudgments, it is nowhere in terms of space; but it is not nowhere in terms of power."69 
Since the soul is aroused by a multitude of illusory images 13 bombarding it on every side yet recognizes they are false, where is the truth the mind perceives? "That is the true light, by which you know all these images are not true. Through it you see the One by which you judge something else you sec is one, and yet this One is not that something which you sec is changcablc.''70 
Furthermore, "ask what gives you pleasure in the body's pleaï 14 sure. You will find it is nothing ocher than harmony. For ifconflict and dissension breed pain, harmonics give birth ro pleasure. Learn then what is the highest harmony. Do not go outside. Return into yourself. Truth dwells in che inner man. And if you discover your nature is mutable, transcend yourself. Bur remember as you tran≠scend yourself you arc transcending yourself as a reasoning soul. Aim for the place whence rhe reason's light was kindled. For where does every good reasoner arrive if nor ar rhc truth, given rhar the truth docs not arrive at itself by reasoning, bur is itself the goal reasoners long for."71 

When we both realize, in rhe course of an argument, that what 15 you say is true, and we both realize that what I say is true, where, may I ask, do we sec chis truth? I do not sec it in you, nor do you see it in me; bur we both sec it in that unchangeable truth which is above our minds. There we perceive with the sight of the mind the form itself according to which these temporal things are made. Having conceived chis form, we possess the truth and conception of things like a word amongst ourselves. 
"Look there for the harmony than which none can be greater, 16 and put yourself in harmony with it. Admit that you arc not the same as it, because it does nor seek itself. Bur you have come to it through seeking-not through space, bur through the mind's de≠sire -that the 'inner man' may be united in pleasure with his spiri≠tual guest. If you do not sec what I am saying, or if you doubt whether it is true, at least sec whether you arc not in doubt about doubting all chis. And ifit is certain you doubt, ask where chis cer≠tainty comes from. Ir comes from rhe light 'which lightcth every man char cometh into rhis world,'72 and which cannot be seen with these eyes, nor with those by which we conceive of images. Rather it is seen with the very eyes with which we say to the images, 'You are not what I am looking for, nor are you what enables me to es≠tablish an order for you and to condemn what I find ugly amongst you, and to approve what is beautiful, when rhar by virtue of which I condemn and praise is more beautiful still. Wherefore I approve it the more, and choose it in preference, nor only to you, but to all those bodies from which I have derived you.' When you sec these things it is with the light char is without spatial and rem≠por:tl dimension and without any image having such dimensions. Surely these things can never be in any way corrupted even ifevery person who reasons were co perish? For such reasoning docs not create but discovers truths. So, before they are discovered, they reï main in themselves, and when they arc discovered, they make us anew. 'Thus che inner man is born again, and the outer perishes from day to day.'"73 
No creature is interposed between our mind by which we unï 17 dcrsrand Him as Father and the truth, chat is, the inner light through which we understand Him. For we also worship the truth itself, which is in no way different from the Father, in Him and with Him; and chis truth is the form of all things which are ereï aced by the One :ind which strive cowards the One. Thus it is dear chat all things arc created through the form chac alone satisï fies the yearning of all things. 
: VI : 
The second confirmation: by way ofhearing and according to Augustine. 
Led by Augustine by way of what our sight perceives, we have 1 
reached the point of discovering chat our mind is formed by the 
divine mind. Again following his lead, let us next pursue che same 
goal by way ofwhat we hear. 
"In harmonious sounds some number exists. Hence some numï 2 bcr also occurs in the ace ofperceiving, because a numbered sound is perceived in a numbered way. Some number also exists in the very nature ofthe sense [ of hearing]; for otherwise it would not be delighted by the harmony of sounds or offended by their harsh≠ness. So whatever it is when something sounds according to which 
we cichcr give approval or arc averse, not rationally but naturally, I call the sense's number. For chis power of approving or condemn∑ ing docs not happen in my cars when I hear the sound; for cars arc open alike co good and bad sounds. Rather, make sure char chcsc two sounds arc noc confounded. For if some verse is pronounced in a way that is now too dipped, now too drawled, it necessarily docs nor last the same length of time even though you have ob≠served the same ratio or principle underlying chc prosodic feet. Thus, in this genre [ of prosody], for the verse co dclighc our cars derives from the power by which we approve of concords and reï jcct discords. But the face chat chc verse is heard in a shorter time when we pronounce it faster and noc more slowly is the outcome of how long our cars hear the sound. So our cars' perception itself when they hear a sound is not the same at all as it would be if they did not hear it. But just as hearing is different from not hearing, so hearing one voice is different from hearing another. So the per∑ ception lasts no longer and is no shorter than the measure of the sound producing it. The measure is different in an iamb than it is in a tribrach;74 and it is more extended in a more extended iamb, briefer in a briefer one, and non-existent in silence. If it is proï duccd in a sound containing number, then it must itself be numï bered; and it cannot exist when the sound producing it docs not exist. Ir is like a print impressed in water, which is only formed af. cer you impress some object in the wacer, and docs not remain when you remove it. But the natural and judgmenMnaking power chat is present in the ears docs not cease co exist when there is si≠lence. Sound docs not sow this power in us, but rather the power itself selects a sound for approval or rejecrion."75 
Who would deny that the power of numbers is in the soul, 3 since the soul secs into motion the numbers ( or rhythms] we find in the pulsing of the veins and in respiration? "When I recite the verse more rapiclly at one point or more slowly, so long as I submit co the rule of the meter, by which che fcer accord as the single to the double, I am not offending or deceiving the judgment of your sense. And yet the sound that is produced in more rapid and so to speak more Reeting syllabics cannot occupy more time than the sound itself lasts. If the judging numbers76 were bound in time's fetter co the same duration as the audible numbers, they could not aspire to making a judgment with respect co audible numbers, which, though produced more slowly, arc based in the same iambic meter. So temporal duration does not possess the numbers chat preside over it in judging. Bur if they were not limited by duration ar all, and I could draw out the iambic sounds as long as I liked in the appropriate and mutually corresponding intervals, they would still be summoned ro judgment. But in reality if I were co utter one syllabic that takes (nor to make it too large} as long as it takes a person to walk three steps, and then another twice chat length, and if I kept on thus lengthening out the iambs, yec preserving the rule of the simple and the double, nonetheless we could not bring the natural judgment [ of our ears] to approve ofthese dimensions. So [in reality] these judging numbers are limited ro certain boundï aries of time and space, which in making judgments they cannot exceed. Anything char exceeds these limits they are not in a posiï tion to judge."77 
"Yer the judging numbers do temper our individual actions. For 4 whatever it is that prevents and checks us from walking with unï even strides, or bearing rime to uneven intervals, or chewing with uneven bites of our teeth, or scratching ourselves with uneven digs of our nails, and whatever it is in any concern that checks us from unbalanced movements when we do anything using the body's limbs, and silendy commands us to observe a certain symmetry, chis is in fact some judging thing." This is what gives men much more than the beasts a sense of, and appreciation for, beauty and charm. For beasts respond immediately to certain stimuli keyed to satisfying physical passion: they are not drawn by the grace of, or by the desire for, beauty. Horses do not choose a more beautiful mare to love; they arc attracted with equal lust to any mare. "But as the Creator of the animal the judging principle introduces God, God whom it certainly behooves us to believe is the author of all that is fitting and harmonious."18 
Furthermore, the numbers which are present in sound and 5 those which come into being in our hearing "arc brought before the judgment ofthese judging numbers and are judged only to the extent that their temporal divisions are retained in the memory. For the sort of number that subsists in temporal divisions we canï not judge in any way without the help of the memory. Now with any brief syllabic whatsoever, since it both begins and ends, the beginning of the sound is at one moment, the end at another. In hearing therefore even the briefest syllable, unless the memory helps us to retain in the rational soul the movement made at the sound's beginning at the very moment when it is no longer the beï ginning but the end of the syllable that is sounding, then we can≠not say chat we have heard anything. Hence it is that, preoccupied with another train of thought, we often appear not to have heard anything from those talking to us. Surely, therefore, we must asï sumc that the judging numbers, which cannot judge numbers situï aced in temporal intervals unless the memory ministers to them like a servant, arc themselves extended over a certain period of rimc?"79 
For although we cannot perceive temporal intervals in the judg∑ 6 ing numbers, ncvcrchclcss they cannot be brought co bear except to judge what occurs in temporal intervals; and not all of them, but only chose chat can be articulated by the memory. When we sing the hymn "Deus creator omnium," we hear the numbers of the verse itself through che numbers in the hearing, yet we take pleasure in chem through che judging numbers. And by means of [still) other numbers I do not know about, we reflect on char plea≠sure; and this we might describe as the judgment on chc judging numbers, since above chem by way of other numbers we can offer a judgment that is hidden but certainly truer. For to be delighted by the sense is one thing, to reflect with the reason is another. It is one thing to give assent to, or to reject, numbered motions-a consequence of the delight taken in the motions' harmony or the repulsion felt at their dissonance. But it is another to reflect whether it is proper or not chat chcy should delight us: and chis comes in reasoning. If it rightly appears co us chat the sense ofde≠light, unless it were itself endowed with certain numbers, could in no way approve of equal intervals and reject disordered ones, then it can also rightly appear chat the reason which is set over chis de≠light cannot make judgments about the numbers inferior to itself without having other, more enduring numbers. At this point, if you agree, let us call che numbers chat had initially risen up before us claiming primacy the sensual numbers, and keep the term "judging," since ic is more honorable, for chose numbers we have found co be superior.80 
"Consider now che strength and power of reason insofar as we can perceive it from its works. For reason lirsc considered-to confine myself to what is relevant co the aim of this work-what good modulation itself is, and saw it consisted in a certain free∑ dom of movement directed towards che goal of its own beaury. Next in the movements of bodies it observed chat variation from the abbreviation or lengthening of time was one thing {in chat it lasted for a longer or shorter period), but variation in the actual metrical beat, in the particular degrees of quickness or slowness, was another. Then the reason noted chat, if time's duration were divided up into a modest interval and one conforming co the hu≠man sense, then it produced different numbers: and it pursued the different kinds of numbers and their ordering until it arrived at the meters of verses. Lastly the reason addressed the question of che role of the soul ( of which reason is che head) in moderating, producing, perceiving, and remembering these numbers: and it separated all the soulïbelonging numbers from the corporeal ones. 
ï BOOK XII ï CHAPTER vr . 
And the reason recognized chat it could not itself be aware of, disï tinguish, or number all of chem with certainty without particular numbers of its own. These it preferred, using a certain judging power, before the rest of the numbers in the lower ordcr."81 
"Now in the case of che pleasure it takes in weighing the tern∑ 8 poral moments and lending its approval co che modification of particular numbers, the reason asks, 'What is it char we like about numbers we hear? Is it anything else but a certain symmetry, and intervals equally measured? Doesn't che pleasure we get from the pyrrhic foot, or the spondee, the anapaest, the d:ictyl, the proï celeusmatic, or the double spondee8i come only from the fact that, when equally divided, one of their parts is matched to the ocher? What is beautiful about the iamb, the tribrach, or the trochee ex∑ cept chat in their minor part they are dividing their major part into two halves? Don't feet of six measures sound both more soothing and festive only because they are divided following two metrical rules: either into two equal pares possessing three mcaï sures each, or into one single part from any of the pares and one double, such char the larger part is twice the smaller and in chis way is divided by the smaller equally into two measures, as it meaï surcs and cuts the four measures into cwo."'81 And likewise with the rest. And we so delight in symmetry chat we demand it not only in the intervals of sounds but in the pauses of silences as well. 
"So the reason questions the soul's carnal delight, which was 9 claiming the judging roles for itself. Since in the numbers of tern∑ poral intervals the reason is charmed by equality, it asks whether the two short syllables ( whichever of chem it hears) arc truly equal or whether it is possible char one of chem lases longer, not quite as long as a long syllable but only a little bit less so, yet long enough to exceed its fellow. Surely one cannot deny that it could happen that our sense ofdelight might not notice this, and thus rake pleaï sure in unequal syllables as though chey were equal? What is worse than this error and inequality? We should be warned by 
ï BOOK XII . CHAPTER vr . 
this to set aside any delight derived from those syllabics that merely imitate equality and where we cannot know for certain whether they achieve it. Rather we know perhaps char they do nor. And yet we cannot deny char, to rhc extent char they do imitate it, they arc beautiful in their way and in their own ordcr.''"4 
"In sensible numbers we did not find equality either reliable or 10 permanent, but we recognized ir only as shadowy and ephemeral. Bur rhc rational soul would nowhere desire it unless it were known from somewhere. This somewhere could not be anywhere in the intervals of time or space, for the former expand and the latter perish. le is nor in the body's forms, which we can never call equal; and it is not in rhc intervals of time, wherein similarly we do not know whether something which flees the sense rakes a somewhat longer or shorter rime than it should. So, I ask, where do you think exists char equality which we desire when we gaze at parric≠ular equal bodies or movements of bodies, and yet do nor dare put our trust in them on closer scrutiny? We would find it, I believe, only there under the rule of what is superior to bodies. But let us ask whether it is in rhe soul, or even above the soul."8s 
We believe that the art of rhythm or meter, which is employed 11 by chose who make verses, possesses certain numbers, in accor≠dance with which chey compose their verses. Whatever those numbers arc, they do not pass away with rhe verses, but remain pennanenrly. We must agree then that certain ephemeral numbers are manufactured by certain permanent numbers. We would sup≠pose chis art is nothing else but a certain disposition of the artificer's rational soul. Now if you questioned a man who had never learned chis art about everything pertaining to numbers, don't you suppose that he could learn it? The numbers do not pass from reacher to student, but the student learns chem internally in his own mind; and he will gravitate cowards something char will print these numbers on his mind and produce that disposition which is called [the metrical) arc; and he will realize the truth of 
89 
the matters he is being questioned about, and respond. But since the numbers under discussion arc unchangeable, they arc eternal and no inequality exists in them. Whence do we suppose rhe soul receives what is eternal and unchangeable if nor from the one, eternal, and unchangeable God~ Thus the student who learns from someone else's questioning rums within himself towards God in order that he may understand the unchanging rruth.86 
VII 
The third confirmation: by way ofthe mind and according to Augustine. 
We have adequately examined our thesis first through the evidence 1 of the sight, and then through suggestions arising from the hear≠ing. Let us explore it now in terms of the evidence of the reason. 
"In speaking each individual reveals his own mind, paying ar-2 rcntion to what is going on within himself; but chis is different from his defining the human mind in terms of special or general knowledge. So when he speaks to me about his own mind≠whether he docs or docs nor understand or docs or docs not will rhis or that particular ching-I just believe him. Bur when he speaks the truth about rhc human mind in terms of species or ge≠nus, I recognize it and give my assent. Hence it is clear that for an individual to sec in himself what another just believes by being told is different from his seeing in the truth what someone else can also sec. The one changes over rime, the other subsists through unchanging eternity. We do not assemble the notions of the hu≠man mind's special or general knowledge by seeing many minds with our corporeal eyes and noticing the similarities. We observe rhc inviolable truth, and from it we derive a definition, as perfectly as we can, not of the nature of the mind of one particular man, but of what the nature ought to be like in terms of everlasting raï tional principles."87 


Moreover, when "the godless think about eternity and rightly 3 blame and rightly praise many aspects ofhuman behavior, by what rules do they finally judge unless by those which enable them to see how each man ought to live, even if they themselves do not live in that same way? Where do they see these rules? Not in their own nature, for such things arc undoubtedly seen by the mind, and yet it is generally agreed chat che minds of such godless men arc mutable. But whosoever sees the rules as immutable is able to see chis [immutability] in the rules, not in the habit of his own mind (since the rules pertain to justice, but the minds of the godï less, it is agreed, arc unjust). But where are these rules inscribed? Where docs even the unjust man recognize what is just? Where docs he see what he ought to possess bur does not himself have? Where else are the rules written down but in the book of chat light which is called truth? From it every just law is copied and in≠scribed in the heart of the man who acts justly; and it comes down, not by literally crossing over, hue by being as it were im≠printed, as the image from a ring is transferred into chc wax and yet does not leave the ring. The man who docs not act, yet secs how he ought co act, is turning away from the light, and yet he is touched by it. Bue the man who does not see how he ought to live has more excuse for sinning, for he is not a transgressor of a law he knows about. Even he is touched at times, however, by chc splendor oftruth present everywhere, when, being admonished, he confesses (his sins] ."88 
l11e preceding Augustinian discussion leads co four conclu-4 sions: 1) char the mind docs not ascend to the highest unless it is drawn by the impulse of chat which is the highest; 2) chac the mind cannot draw upon eternal principles of its own freewill co arï rive ac judgments unless it is able to attune itself to eternity; 3) that the mind cannot grasp things unchanging with an unchange≠able reason unless it can attain the very principle of immutability; and 4) that many minds could not grasp the same truth unless ei≠ther a single human intcllcct were to exist in them, which is imï possible, or at least many hum:tn intellects were to bathe themï selves in the same fountain of truth, just as the best way people come co know an artist's design is when they have penetrated to the single rational principle he used to construct his work. 


We can find support for Augustine's views principally in two 5 ways: first through the universal force of reasoning, and second, though the universal notions of truth, goodness, and being. Every intellect is aware of a necessary consequence in things which arc contingent or non-existent. For instance, it is a necessary conscï qucncc that, if Pl:tto runs, he moves, even though Plato, his runï ning, and his moving arc themselves contingents. Ir is necessary too rhac when Plato argued Plato was talking, although neither Plato nor his argument nor his enunciation of it arc occurring in the present. The unch:inging necessity ofsuch consequences is not based on the things in time, which arc either totally non-existent or contingent; nor docs it rest solely on the thoughts of rhc soul, or it would not be true necessity but a mental fiction, or rather it would not be immutable since our thinking changes. So it rests on the eternal and necessary series of things that the divine mind, which sets everything in order, contains within itself, and where it gives things their status relative to each ocher. Therefore true rcaï soning's every light is lie from chc prime truth and reflected back cowards it, since the necessity ofevery consequence is based on the supreme necessity of the whole of n:trure. 
We arc caught the same by the universal concepts of truth and 6 goodness, which we have shown above ro be present in the minds of all insofar as they continually compare things true and good [ to these concepts]. Now if God is truth and goodness itself, it fol≠lows that it is God who illumines the minds of men whenever 

we make judgments, with God as our normative measure, about things true and good. And the notion of being itself, which is imï planted in us all, reaches us che same. For all men judge chat one thing is completely non-existent, chat another exists but impcr≠fccdy, and chat another exists more perfectly. But such a scale of being cannot occur or be understood unless it is by way of our ap≠proaching the highest being, which is God, or of withdrawing from Him. But approaching Him and withdrawing from Him can only be evident to a person who sees God Himself. However, men with greater mental training also see God in another way, namely when they resolve all the secondary classes of things into the pri≠mary classes, and these [again] into what is called simple and ab≠solute being. Such a being is either a deceptive fiction or it is God. Bue absolute being cannot be a deception, if something truly exists in things. If comparison of different levels of being on the one hand and resolving them on the other do nor occur except through the power of the highest and absolute being, then obviously it oc≠curs through God; for it is He who has formed the intellect which 
compares and resolves. 
One might add chat being itself shines out so transparently that 7 it cannot be thought not to exist. Just as what we call notl1ingness presents itself to us as totally devoid ofbeing, so being presents itï self as totally devoid of non-being. In being, therefore, there is ob≠viously no potentiality at all for non-being, nor any defect in its being. On the first counr, it is eternal; on the second, it is comï pletely filled with the roral perfection of being which is God. Thus, when we see being most clearly and in the proper way, it presents itself to us as God. Two further arguments confirm this. 
1) Being is so manifest chat in individual known things it is always known. If someone declares Plato is running, he is saying chat as a being he is running. If he says Plato is a man and is white, he is saying chat he exists in the species a) of man and b) of what is white. Finally being is itself understood in the different modes 


of being from which individual objects arc constituted, just as aniï mal is understood in all the different species of animals. 2) Everyï thing else is known through being itself, whereas being is known through itself. In intuitive cognition what is called a non-entity is understood through an entity, a potential being through a being in act; and a being in act is known through the act of existing. Such an act requires absolute being. If every being is known through the being that is the act of every being, it follows chat all existing things arc known through the being which is the act and origin of them all. If above being in potentiality and being in act we set the absolute being which is neither in potentiality nor in act, then chis being will either be a mental fiction or be God or be a signification of God (as the Placonists pur it). But God is the acr, the author of all existing things; and through the ovcrAowing of His act He moves the mind prior to, more vchemcndy, and more lastingly chan all ocher objects presented to it. Or rather, other things move the mind through His power. So absolute being itself, that is the pure act, the effective cause of all existing things, God in other words, is the first thing chat in a wonderful way presents itself to minds, and Rows into them, and fills them with light, and reveals all ocher things to chem. Though we have within us its cvcrlasring form and have a notion ofit, and though we know everything else through it and in it, yet we do not realize this. Similarly the eye is not always aware that it is continually seeing chc light of the sun and other things through it and in it; and the reason docs not no∑ cicc that it is continually reasoning even though it is reasoning vir≠tually all the time. For we do not normally notice things to which we have long become accustomed. For who chinks about himself breathing? 
When the Placonists call God on high being itself, they mean 8 nor the being which is in essence, but the principle of that being, chc being above being, whatever is conceived by way of some proper rational principle of being or comprehended in some noï tion [ of it] . For, striccly speaking, they refer to God on high by way of unity and goodness, but reserve the term being for the sub≠sequent ..God of God, Light of Light," who has descended from primal unity into a trinity, the trinity of essence, life, and mind.89 And because any two members in chis triad dwell in the other one in its own way, the Placonists multiply the three into nine. 90 Hence one must look to nine as the number dividing the angels, and a similar gradation among the souls of the blessed.91 They say that the contemplating mind is formed by God on high through chc unity that is the mind's head, and by the second god through the intellect. But chat is the Placonists' affair. It suffices for us that the soul is formed by the divinity. 


From all of che foregoing one may conclude that the human 9 reason, in contemplating the order of things, always revolves around che divine reason, which bestows che order on all things, no less than the spheres of the world revolve around its mid-point. But if a revolution, which naturally, continuously, and of its own accord rotates around a center chat is everlasting, is itself everlast≠ing, then our reason ought co be everlasting. Since in understand≠ing it is turned back without an intermediary to God through God and in God, this dearly testifies chat it has itself proceeded without an intermediary from God. For who is going co deny chat what comes direcdy into being from eternity will itself be eternal~ Moreover, it is in God that our reason secs an eternal species qua eternal, when it concludes, with unswerving logic, chat the species is eternal. Bue it secs the species as it receives it. Ir follows then that it receives in an eternal way. And since our reason receives as it is in itself {in cl1at it grasps in accordance with its own nature), it follows chat it is itself eternal since it receives in an eternal way. 
But chis reason of ours is nothing ocher than intcllecrual life itself. 
So it will live forever; or rather, if ir is going co be always, it will 
understand forever. 


I should like to pursue the matter a little further, travelling, as 10 we so ofi:en do, in the company of Augustine. "When we reason, it is the rational soul char reasons. For nothing reasons unless it understands. The body docs nor understand and neither docs the soul with the help of the body; for when che soul wishes to underï stand, it turns aside from chc body. For what is understood is al≠ways of chc same nature, whereas nothing corporeal is always of the same nature. So the body cannot help the soul in its striving for understanding; the best it can do is not co be in the way."92 
Ifthe soul of itself reasons and in reasoning attains the truth, 11 then obviously ic attains the truth through itself. So it cleaves to the truth by virtue of which all the things it mains in understand≠ing arc true; and it cleaves more closely than it docs to sensible ob≠jects or their images, which it docs not attain through itself but through [various] instruments and other means. "For of itself the rational soul could not contemplate the truth unless it were intiï mately united with it.... The objects we grasp with our sense we perceive to be outside ourselves and contained in space, so char we cannot even really say we perceive them. But the objects we under≠stand arc not thought to be anywhere else but in the rational soul chat understands them; for simultaneously we understand that they arc not located in spacc."93 
∑∑so with this joining of chc intuiting mind and of che truth it 12 intuits (we have three options]. Either the rational soul is the sub≠strate ( or substance] and che truth is in the substrate; or the reï verse, the truth is the substrate and the mind is in che substrate; or each of them is a substance. Ifit is the first of the three, then our rational soul is just as immortal as that truth, char supreme and universal reason, which cleaves inseparably to our rational soul and which cannot exist in it unless it is living. The same necessarily follows with the second option; for if the truth ( which is ca.lied the reason)9ï contains nothing liable to change, as is clearly the case, then nothing chat is in it, as in a substrate, can be liable co change. 

The dispute then swirls around the third option. For ifche ratio∑ nal soul is a substance, and the (supreme} reason to which it is atï t.'.lched is also a substance, then it is nor absurd to imagine the posï sibility of the brrer remaining while the former ceases to exist. Bur it is clear that as long as the rational soul is nor separated from chis reason bur cleaves to it, the soul must necessarily abide and live. Well then, what force could separate it? Surely nor a corpoï real force, whose power is weaker and whose origin is inferior and whose order is far separate from it? Certainly nor. Is it a power of the soul then? But how could even that be so? Arc we saying chat one stronger soul (whosoever it is) cannot contemplate this su∑ preme reason until it has separated another soul from it? And yet this reason is never wanting co anyone contemplating it, if all conï template it. And since nothing is stronger than this reason, since nothing is more unchanging, it will never be possible for a soul that is not yet united co it co be stronger than one that is. The reï maining possibilities arc either that this reason separates the ratio∑ nal soul from itself. or char the soul is separated by the will. Yer there is nothing of envy in this reason char would prevent ir from offering itself ro souls for their enjoyment. Again, the more someï thing exists, the more it makes char to which it is united exist; and the contrary ro this is extinction. But who would declare char the rational soul is voluntarily separated from the truth, given char it never desires anything more keenly than to be united with the truth? What then? Should we now conclude that the soul is imï mortal? Or is it liable to extinction, even though it cannot be scpï arared? Surely if the power oftruth affects the rational soul by be≠ing united with it (and it is impossible char it should not), it must affect it by giving it being. For the truth is understood to be greatï est where immutability too is greatest. So in a way truth of itself compels each soul ir affects co exist. So the soul cannot be de≠stroyed unless it is separated from this reason. But it cannot be separated. So it cannot perish."9s 

"What gives us pause here is that a stupid soul appears co be 13 separated from reason and to be in some sense defective, while a wise soul appears to be in its essence more certain and more comï pletc. Nobody can doubt that if the soul is wisest when it contcmï plates rhc truth which always exists in the same way, and if it cleaves to the truth immovably (united to it by divine love), and if all things, howsoever they exist, come from the essence which exï ists to the highest and greatest degree, then either the rational soul comes from that truth as it exists, or it comes from itself. If it exï ists through itself, then, since it the cause of its own existence and never abandons itself, it never perishes. If it comes from the truth, we must ask ourselves carefully what could be opposite to the truth which might deprive the soul of its being soul, which is the gift of truth. What then? Could it perchance be falsehood, since rhe other is truth? But rhe extent to which falsehood can harm the soul is well known and no secret. For it can do nothing further but deceive; bur unless someone is alive, he is not deceived. So falseï hood cannot kill the soul. But if falsehood, which is truth's con≠trary, cannot deprive rhc soul of its being soul-rhe gift given it by truth, truth being absolutely invincible -what else can one stumï blc on char can deprive the soul of its being soul~ TI1c answer is nothing. For nothing is more capable of destroying what is made by its contrary than its contrary. Bur if our quest is for rhc conï trary of truth, nor insofar as it is truth, but insofar as it exists to the highest and greatest degree (although it totally exists insofar as it is the truth, since we call the truth that by which all things arc true insofar as they exist, and they exist insofar as they arc true), rhcn I would certainly not avoid an argument which obviously supports my thesis. For if no essence qua essence contains its conï rrary, then still less docs chat prime essence, which is called the truth insofar as it is essence. But what is first is true. For all es≠sence is essence for no other reason than chat it is. Bur being has no contrary except non-being. So no cnriry is the contrary of cs≠
107 


sence. So there cannot possibly exist a contrary to that substance which exists to the highest and first degree. The rational soul de≠rives its very being from that substance (the fact that the soul is not self-derived results from this substance which is more outï standing than the soul itself, and it docs not derive its being from anything other than the truth, since truth alone allots it well≠being). And if chis is so, it follows that no thing exists whereby soul may lose being, since no thing exists contrary to that thing whereby it has being; and therefore it docs not cease to be. But since it acquires wisdom by turning towards its source of being, so by turning away it can lose wisdom. For turning away is the oppo≠site of turning towards. But what it derives from something to which nothing is contrary it does not derive from what it can lose. Therefore the soul cannot perish."96 


