
Ch:ipter 4 Confirmation ofthe above. Further discussion of the Ideas. Chapter 5 Confirmation ofthe above by way ofsigns. Chapter 6 Second proof: the mind is the subject ofeternal truth. Chapter 7 An objection from the Skeptics and irs rebuttal. Knowledge ofsomething certain is possible. Chapter 8 An objection from the Peripatetics and its rebuttal. That the truth is at home in the soul. 


BOOK IX 
: I : 
To demonstrate more clearly its immortality, the soul is proved by way of the rational power to be not only undivided but independent ofthe body. First proof: that the mind rrjlects 11pon itself 
By way of the rational power we have thus far proved that the soul I is an undivided and immortal form. We must next prove that it does not depend on the body; and from this we can properly con• clude its immortality. 
Divisible things do not reflect upon themselves. But if someone 2 were to argue that some divisible thing does reffect upon itself, we will immediately ask: Is one part of this object reffecting upon an­other, or a part upon the whole, or the whole upon a part, or the whole rather upon its whole self! If the first, then the same part is not reflecting upon itself, since parts differ among themselves. If the second or third, the same conclusion follows, for a part is one thing, the whole another. Apparently, the fourth possibility is the only one left: that the whole is reflecting upon the whole. This is tantamount to saying chat all the parts arc reffccting upon all rhe parts. Grant this. But after such reffecting is complete, let us then ask whether in the object some part remains outside another part or differs from another, or whether no part docs? If a part re­mains, then one part will exist in this position or in this manner, another part in that, and so they will not yet be reAeccing in turn upon each other. But if no part rem:1.ins, then assuredly no one part in chat object will be separate, or be distinguished, from :1.n­other. This object is so entirely indivisible th:tt it is constituted neither from quantitative parts nor from matter and form. There· fore an object either does not reflect upon itself, or, if it docs, it is indivisible. 

Elsewhere we said that the soul reflects upon itself in four ways: 3 through the intellect upon its own nature when it seeks, finds, and considers itself; through the will upon the same nature when it de­sires and loves itself; through the intellect upon the very act of un• demanding when it understands an object and understands it is undemanding; and through the will upon the act ofthe will when it wilts something and wills itself to will. Plato attributes these four wheels to the soul's chariot;• and I think that this is that four­fold fountain of perperual nature, the fountain which Pythagoras says was granted by Jupiter to the soul of men.1 If no divided thing reflects upon itself, then our rational four-horse chariot, which rums upon itself via its four wheels, and the fountain itself within, which flows back upon itself by way of its four streams, is simple and completely indivisible. But reflection of this kind does not turn back from body to body, but from soul to soul; and the soul has been proved, both by the many earlier arguments and by this argument here, to be indivisible because it reflects upon itself. So self-reflection is free of the body, since it neither begins from nor returns to it. The soul's substance is even freer of the body, if its reflection, which is its morion, is free of the body. Hence the ratio­nal soul, in being as in moving and in doing, does not depend in any way on the body. 
Again, if the soul reflects upon itself via its operation, it also 4 does so via its essence. So the soul's essence reflects upon itself. But each thing's turning back is linked to its setting out and the reverse. So the soul which reflects upon itself exists from itself, and exists from itself principally in three ways: firstly in terms of its form, because it is not being formed via another form ( other­wise it would return not co itself but to that form): secondly in terms of its founchtion, because it is not being sustained by an­other (for this form which is resting on itself when it strives for it• self docs not rest on another form); and thirdly in terms of its simplicity, because it is not compounded from parts (for how can that form be unfolding across a surface of parts when it is wholly folding back upon its own center?). What thus comes from itself exists forever, because, when something stops existing, it stops ei­ther because it is being abandoned by its forming cause, or because ir is losing its foundation, or because it is being dissolved into parts. Bue what turns back upon itself, because it is undivided, is not dissolved; and because it is the form of itself, it is not aban• doncd by the forming cause; and because it remains in itself, it is never without its foundation. 

: II : 
Second proof the more the mind is separated from the body. the better its condition. 
If the soul rook irs origin in any way from the body, then the more 1 closely it was united wirh the body, the better would be its condi­tion. For every thing is preserved and perfected by its origin. Bue in reality the contrary happens. 
The soul's most outstanding parts arc the intellect and the will. 2 When we arc preoccupied with corporcals, the incellccc either per• ccivcs nothing at all or docs not discern truly, since it is deceived by the senses and by rhe phanrasy; and the will is afflicted so long as it is vexed by many bodily cares. Contrariwise, when the soul despises corporeals and when the senses have been allayed and the clouds of phantasmata dissipated, and it perceives something on its own, then the intellect discerns truly and is at its brightest. We see this in the case of chose who prophesy during the quiet of sleep or some other alienation from the body. Hence many, as Plato declares in the Crito and Apology? as they approach death predict future events: it as if they saw at that moment those events written beforehand in the higher spirits to which the rational soul is naturally joined if only it is not impeded by the body.. Whence Socrates, having been brought to judgment by false accusers, first predicted to the judges their future penitence, to his accusers their downfall, and to the state sedition; and then in prison he an­nounced beforehand chat the day of his death had been shown him by a spirit during repose. Thus Theramenes, when he had been cast into prison and was drinking the poison, predicted to his adversary Critias that his death was nigh, which happened a short time later.5 Posidonius the Stoic writes that a dying citizen of Rhodes called out the names ofsix contemporaries and declared who among chem would die first, who second, and so on.6 Aris­totle too writes that his friend Eudemus of Cyprus, when he had arrived ar the ciry of Phaerae in Thessaly, fell gravely ill and saw in his sleep a youth of surpassing beaury who declared chat he would shortly recover; chat Alexander, the tyrant of that city, would die in a few days; and that Eudemus himself would return home five years later. Aristotle says chat Eudemus did improve a lircle afterwards, that the tyrant was killed, and that Eudemus died five years later and thus his soul returned to its native soil!7 Didn't Callanus the Indian when he was on the point of dying predict a speedy death to the king, Alexander [the Grcat),a and the dy­ing Pherecydes of Syros prophesy to the Ephesians a victory over the Magnesians?9 One can read many other accounts of the same kind. Bur not only does the intellect sec many things dearly when we live apart from the body's contagion, but the will too is fulfilled: it is no longer afflicted by any disturbing passions bur ar­dently rejoices in things divine as in things most resembling itself. 

It follows that che body is not che origin of the rational soul. if 3 the further away the soul travels from it, the more perfect its con­dition. Ir follows too that, if the more the mind is immersed in this body the more it is enfeebled, and the more distant it is the more it is perfect, then the mind will be most perfect when it has soared completely beyond this body. Total perfection, however, does not have the same origin as death: it is life in its entirety, so entire as to be perperual. \Viii the rational soul become enfeebled in this change of its condition when it does not perish in exiting the body, given that no more radical change than this is possible for it:10 
: III : 
Third proof: the mind resists the body. 
No thing can oppose its origin of its own accord, otherwise it 1 would be voluntarily borne towards its own death which necessar­ily follows once its origin is lost. Moreover, whatever some effect achieves, it accomplishes by the force and aid of its origin. So if it fought against its cause, in the struggle the cause would be fighting against itself. The soul opposes and fights against our body, or rather against all bodies. Therefore it docs not originate from any body.11 
The soul's principal offices arc two: to contemplate and to de-2 liberate. In both it opposes bodies. First let us see how it opposes chem in the process ofcontemplation. Daily and in many ways, ex­ternal bodies, variously disposed as they are, so move our body's instruments, those allotted to the senses, that for the moment they beguile chem. The reason amends and corrects the deception, as we have elaborated elsewhere, when it arrives at a judgment differing from that indicated by an external body or announced by its own body; and often it judges in an opposite way. In chis it condemns the affection of its own body and that of others alike. Let us dismiss for now the examination of other things and take up the supreme contemplation of what is supreme, so that we can learn how far in this the mind contradicts corporeal nature. The phantasy succeeds the external senses, and the senses follow on the disposition of their own body and of other bodies. So we at# tribute the judgment of the senses and the phantasy to the dispo# sition of bodies, and we say the judgment is in accord with the corporeal affection. When our rational soul. desiring to find out what God is, inquires from such masters, then the phanrasy, which is too rash a teacher and artisan, fashions a statue from five materials which the external senses have presented to it as being the most beautiful of them all. These materials it has received from the world, yet in such a way that it renders them more excel# lent in some measure than it has received them from the world through the senses. So the phantasy offers us a light which is so clear chat nothing seems brighter, so immense that nothing seems more immense, one which is diffused as it were through the infinite void and decked with countless colors and which revolves in a circle (and on account of this revolution it echoes with the most dulcet measures filling and charming the ears). The phantasy imagines it as redolent of the most fragrant odors, abounding too with all the tastes, the sweetest of all imaginable, and as being wonderfully soft to the touch, delicate, smooth, and duly rem# pered. The phantasy proclaims that this is God. The world's body offers us nothing more beautiful. Corporeal sense comes into contact with nothing better and proclaims nothing more excel# lent. The phancasy, friend of the senses, fashions nothing more 

sublime. 
But the reason meanwhile from the height of the mind's watch# 3 cower looks down on the phantasy's childish games and exclaims, "Be careful liccle soul, beware of the cricks of chis idle sophist. Do you seek God? Take a light which is brighter than the sun's light in che same degree chat chc sun's light is brighter than the shad­ows; if you compare it to the sun's light, che latter, even if it is a thousand thousand times dearer, appears as a shadow. Take too a light which is so much more relined that it eludes the eye's gaze. Do not extend it through emptiness, lest it be compounded from pares and so need che prop of parts and space. Gather che whole if you can into a point so chat from chis infinite union it can be infinitely powerful. Then let this point be everywhere present if you will, not scattered in space but wholly present in any point in space; not dyed wich the endless variety ofcolors (for pure light is more splendid chan polychrome light), and not revolving or re• sounding (for I do not wish chis point to be moved or to be struck or to break, and I deem rest more perfect than motion). Subtract odors too and tastes and being soft to che couch, Iese it be com­posed of too gross a nature. At this juncture we arrive at a reful­gence no space contains, a resonance no time bears away, a fra­grance no gust of wind dispels, a savor no glurtony deadens, an intimate softness that satiety never strips away." 

"Do you w:mt co gaze upon the face ofGod again~ Look ac the 4 universal world full of che light ofthe sun. Look at che light in the world's matter full of a.ll the universal forms and forever changing. Subtract, I beg you, maccer from the light and put the rest aside: suddenly you have soul, chat is, incorporeal light, replete with all che forms, buc changeable. Again subtract change from this soul­light. Now you have arrived ac angelic intellect, at incorporeal light filled with all the forms but [now] unchanging. Subtract from this che diversity by means of which each form is different from the light and brought into the light from elsewhere, with the resulc that che essence ofthe light and ofeach form is now the same, and the light forms itself and through its forms forms all. This light shines out infinitely, since it is naturally radiant, and it is neither sullied nor constrained by the admixture ofanything else. Because it dwells in no one thing, it is poured through all things. le dwells 
in no one thing in order that it may blaze in its fullness through all things. le lives from itself and it gives life to all, since its shadow, like the sun's light, is alone what gives rise to life in bodies. k senses all and gives sense to all if its shadow awakens all the senses in all. Finally, it loves individual things if they arc preeminently its own. So what is the sun's light? God's shadow. So what is God? God is the Sun of the sun. The sun's light is God in the body of the world. [But] God is the Sun above the angelic intel­lects. 0 soul, here, here is your God! The phantasy shows you His shadow. The shadow ofGod is such that it is the most beauti• ful of sensible things. What do you think God's light is like? If God's shadow shines so dazzlingly, how much more intensely does God's light shind You love the sun's light everywhere before all else, or rather you love it alone. Love God alone, His light alone, o soul. Love infinitely the infinite light of God in His beneficence. You will then be radiant and experience infinite joy.12 So, I beseech you, seek His face and you will rejoice for crerniry. But do not move, pray, in order to touch it, because it is stability itself. Do not perplex yourself with things various in order ro apprehend it, because it is unity itself. Cease motion and take the many and bind them into one. Straightway you will comprehend God who long ago utterly comprehended you."11 
In chis quest-what a marvel, immortal God!-how much does the mind shrink from all bodies, docs it scatter their images and deceits, docs it condemn the phantasy and the senses, the bodies' companions! Certainly, just as it is a substance through it• self. taking its origin from no body, so through itself it performs its own work at various times without the assistance of any body, or rather-and this is even more wonderful-it performs it in op• position to all the apparatus of bodies. In doing its work it would never cut itself offfrom all corporeal blemish, unless it were in its essence still more cut off from all corporeal roots. And because it cannot oppose the universal nature of bodies through any power of the body -for a tiny part does not rebel against che whole -it follows chat it operates in the present via its own power without the aid of corporeal things; and so in the future it should be able to do chis even more. We have now said enough about how the mind in contemplating opposes che body. Next let us talk about bow much it opposes it in deliberating. 
Often when the stomach is hungry or the lung chirstyl4 or the 6 brain grows heavy with sleep or the genitalia swell with seed, then the sense, che body's companion, incites us towards food, drink, sleep, and coirion -incites us, I say, or rather announces the body's excitements to che rational soul. But che reason makes a judgment that it muse abstain from these for the sake of contem· plation or decency, and at its behest we often do abstain. When we endure contumely or injustice, che rage for vengeance boils in our breast. Then the soul's motive power, the companion and guest of che body, moves the feet and hands to cake revenge. Ac times, for the sake of peace and quiet, the reason orders them to desist and restrains them. Often the heart quakes in the face of perils, but to defend our native land reason orders it into battle, whence, though unwillingly, it marches out against the foe. But the ends governing the reason's deliberation are incorporeal, namely truth and honor. When our Plato, a man of heaven, chose an un­healthy place to house the Academy for the sake of mastering the body, wasn't his rational soul opposing the body's nature?15 When Xenocraces, 16 the beloved disciple of Plato, and Origen17 their follower burned their own genitalia in order to completely extinguish the fires of lust, wasn't the invincible soul declaring war on the body's members? And prior co chem the Magi of Per• sia, the priests of Egypt and the Pythagorean philosophers, to weaken Venus, abstained from wine and meat.11 I leave aside chose ancient priests who were consecrated to the Great Mocher or co Saturn: the former castrated themselves,19 the latter mutilated 

themselves.:• 1 omit roo che very first Christians, than whom che world has witnessed nothing braver, nothing more marvelous. 
Wherefore nobody should object co us char in the past few have 7 resisted, and today even fewer resist rhc body's desires. To che con• crary, we resist chem all daily for various reasons: some for the sake of healch, others of honor, ochers of peace, ochers ofjustice, the contemplation ofGod, {and} blessedness. But even if we can never seem che body's attack, ycc che struggle, which in us is conrinual, would be enough co show char rhc soul is combating chc body. If there were no ocher nature in us than chc corporeal. as soon as the body's desire drew us cowards something, we would hurclc for­ward like brutes, and neither care at all nor deliberate whether what the body draws us towards can be achieved. For nothing fights itself. Yee almost always and in all things we arc struggling against an assaulc by chc whole body. So there exists in us some­thing beyond che body, something apart from its very roors,21 apart, char is, from chc whole nature of the humors and elements, something by which we can oppose all their inclinations and tran­scend them in thought and in desire. And it is something apart too from the whole celestial nature infused by the heavens chem• selves in chc humors and diffused through the property of che hu­mors, something by which we can even at times fight against their celestial inclinations ( which the astrologers themselves concede co us), and perpetually chink about and reverence a substance more outstanding far chan che heavens. 1 omit che face char whatever is produced by the heavens' corporeal and mobile power is corporeal and entirely mobile and cannot exceed corporeal and mobile na­ture. So che rational soul is able co live apart from both the ele­mental and the celestial nature infused in rhe clements. But if some one of the Platoniscs were to say chat it always rides in a ce­lestial vehicle, we would retort char the soul docs not depend on che vehicle bur the vehicle on che soul. and chat according co the Platoniscs the everlasting soul always gives life to che everlasting vehicle.22 But let us return to our intended argument. 


It should not trouble us chat che soul often yields to the body, 8 because ir docs nor yield co force but co the love whereby it is drawn to the body (which is alive because of it) as to its son and handiwork. A mother loves her son as her handiwork. As an in• fanr the son longs immoderately for food. The mother cells him to leave it be. If the boy has been well brought up, he then becomes quiet and sits still; bur if he has been badly brought up, he kicks up a fuss and disturbs the house. The morher has picy on her wailing son whom she much loves, bur she docs nor yec consent to his caking food, unless, having communed with herself, she 6rsc decides that he can have a snack wirhour harming his body, or, if something harmful happens co him, chat he can easily be helped by medicine. Only then does the child receive rhc food. The mother is not compelled co yield by the infant: delight in her handiwork rather induces the mother to yield to her son. She 6­nally yields to the degree she decides she should yield. Often she decides correccly, but at times she is wrong because she is too eager to yield and docs noc examine the consequences carefully enough. The soul's relationship co the body is the same. Therefore, if it were natural for the soul to yield to the body, every soul would al­ways surrender to the senses. Bur since quite often it opposes chem in the process of reflecting, whenever it does consent, it yields, not because ic is compelled to or because of its nature, but ouc of love. It is love whereby the highest power of rhe soul is im• printed on the middle power, the middle on rhe lowest, the lowest on the viral complexion,ll the viral complexion on the body; and this is because the Platonisrs think thac from the substance of rhe rational soul, as from the sun, the irrational life of the body is poured out like light, and that the soul behaves towards this life as cowards a child. The body is disposed by way of the celestial souls co receive this child, as Timaeus teaches.2" Bue what shall we say when a rational soul [actually) kills its own body, whether it docs so by design or our of wrath or fear or grief:' How could it ever embark on such an act if the body were the origin of the soul. since a desire cannot naturally rebel against itself:' No beast will­ingly kills itself, because an animus against the body cannot arise in rhc soul of beasts which itself arises from rhc body. But man, though he is an animal with more discretion. often kills himself, predicting, I suppose, that he will outlive the body and that, rather than destroying himself, he is discharging himself of the body's burden. 


: IV : 
Fourth proof: the s0111 acts freely. 
For the most pare we will know chat the human soul docs not 1 arise in any way from the body if we have understood on the basis of a spccinc argument how free in it the freedom to choose is. For what is bound to the body whose nature is determined cannot have an operation char is free and separate. Indeed, from some general consideration no one action proceeds unless some particu­lar estimation intervenes, because motions and acrions occur with regard to particulars. Take the similar case when someone consid­ers rhc exercise of the body in general to be useful. l11ough he considers it useful. he docs not rake exercise yet, unless he has first debated about the number of possible ways of exercising and which way is best. And when he has elected one particular kind of exercise among the many, then he rakes up rhe task. If it is walk­ing, he walks, if riding, he rides. 
The intellect is naturally busy with the conception of universal 2 reasons. Wherefore, in order for its apprehending to issue forth inro some action, its universal conception must be guided towards certain particulars. Bur a universal notion potentially contains many, nay infinite, particulars, just as the common genus of cxcr• cisc embraces countless ways of exercising. The universal notion, therefore, can be distributed into equally different particulars. A decision on what to do follows on such distribution. A different decision can hence ensue. So the intellect's judgment about things to do is nor naturally confined to just one thing. Ir is there­fore free. 


Certain things lack liberty ofjudgment because they possess no 3 judgment at all, plants for instance. Ochers, though they have it, have it linked to some one object, beasts for instance. Its natural canniness makes a sheep judge a wolf to be a danger co itself and it runs away: with its nature compelling ir, it cannot but flee. Natu­ral instinct leads swallows to build their nests, bees their hives, spiders their webs.25 So all the animals in che same species always fashion their own particular works in the same way without ever learning and without ever varying, because the natural species char directs them is present from the onset and remains unchanging. Bue men both learn and arc always doing different things, yet they have one nature and have it from the beginning. So they arc nor impelled to action by their nacure: rather, using their judgment, they themselves do various things in various ways.26 \Vhence, in our opinion, it happens that the trees and the animals never err in their particular motions, in what they make, in what they choose; bur char man repeatedly errs. This is not because a more perfect intellect is present in these trees and animals -they do not possess any intellect at all-but rather because they are impelled by chc divine intellect chat never errs. But man is guided by his own inrel­lecr char can err. \Vhenever he rests from his own actions for a while, he coo is guided by God and does not err, as we can see from prophecies and miracles. If he were always led like the ocher animals, he would err even less to the degree that he is a more per­


feet instrument. Again, if the animals guided themselves as man docs, chcy would err more than men in chat they have been allot• red a less perfect species.17 Since in doing things man docs nor naturaUy possess a judgment confined co one action, he is there• fore necessarily frcc.28 That he judges freely we deduce from the face chat he guides himself to judging; char he guides himself, from the fact that he reAecrs on his own judgment; chat he re• Accrs, from che face that he knows he is judging and is establishing a limit tojudgment. 1l1is liberty the intellect is allotted by its own power. For the intellect apprehends nor only chis or chat good, bur the common good. Since rhc intellect moves rhe will, however, by a form apprehended by itself, and since in all things the mover and the moved arc in proportional and mutual agreement, rhc rational will is nor naturally determined except for chc common good. Par• cicular goods arc contained under the general good. Therefore wh:ttcvcr is offered co rhc will as good, the will can be drawn co, as long as no natural inclination for the contrary prevents it. This is shown by what we said above, namely char the will chooses many things chat arc counter to rhc benefit and pleasure ofthe corporeal narurc.19 Ir prescribes an order oflifc chat is frequcncly harmful co the body: ir hares the body, enfeebles it, and torments it. And chis beasts never do, whose every impulse and action is for their body's benefit. 
It is worthwhile bearing in mind chat certain things arc said by 4 chc philosophers to be necessary, ocher things impossible, ocher things in between (possible in ocher words}; and chat of the possi• hie some usually happen, ochers more rarely, but others do and do not happen almost equally. They chink chis arrangement is suited for the most part to the universe. They also affirm chat some things arc natural, but ochers arc the rcsulr of the will. They add moreover chat nowhere will a potency exist chat is equally dis• posed ro each of two contingencies unless it is present in agents governed by the will. For natural agents arc more determined than voluntary ones. Finally, they assert that the natural offices of each species cannot be in vain, but that man's duty is to cake counsel; and yet chat it is pointless to deliberate over opposites when nei­ther of them, on the mere basis of conjecture, can be chosen or adopted. 10 


Our soul's freedom, however, can be principally discovered if s we sec more clearly how the souls of animals arc moved. \Vhen a beast is hungry and if its particular food is set before its eyes, its (irrational] soul decides that chis food is going to be good for it, (and] its appetite desires it and moves the limbs towards it. We want to know whence derives this movement of the limbs? Doubt­less from the appetite. The appccice's motion, whence docs that come? From a decision: because it decided the food was good for itself, it desired it. \Vhencc che decision? From the form of one food or another appearing before the animal's eyes and from its body's inner hunger. For whenever an animal's body is hungry and chis particular food comes into view, the irrational soul decides whether it is good for it and desires it. You can sec that the princi­ple of the movement is not in this soul but in the body: in the body of the food provided and in the body of the animal affected. Therefore chis soul does not properly guide the body nor is it properly moved by itself; rather chc nature alike of chc food and of its body attracts this soul, and the limbs too arc subject to the attraction. 
We will adduce four proofs of chis. The nrst proof is chat, 6 when a special food appears and its body is chus affected, the irra­tional soul immediately decides and desires. After it has seen the shape of the food, it does not delay its decision or desire for a length of time, even the briefest. It is as if chis soul were bringing almost nothing to bear from its own power: rather, once the par­ticular reason for a decision has been set before it, then the effect of deciding immediately follows. And this is not inappropriate. For a form is the principle of doing just as the heat of nre is the 
37 


principle of hearing. But with forms, one has been imprinted by nature, as heat and levity in fire, while another has been appre­hended, like the species of food via the sight. Fire's appetite and motion is the result of the imprinted form. 111c decision and de­sire of the animal affected [by the sight of food] is the result of the apprehended form of rhc food. 1l1crcforc the principle of this mo­tion is the food and its form. Just as fire is not moved of itself be­cause it cannot not ascend as long as nothing stops it, and cannot not burn as long as something combustible is there, so the animal is not moved of itself, because it cannot not be drawn cowards chose things which arc variously offered to it. 
1l1c second proof is char the irrational soul never decides, de-7 sires, or pursues except in response to rhc body's need. In all its action the end is what is best for rhc body. Bur universally the ulti­mate end is virtually the same as the beginning. The beginning of fire is the moon's concavity and the moon's concavity is the end of the motion of fire because each cause acts for and moves towards its own end. So in an animal the principle of [its] actions is the body's nature or soul, not the pure soul bur the corporeal soul, the one that preserves the nature and life, the artificer of natural things, in its entirety, since in nature and corporeal life preserving things corporeal is the end of acting. 
1l1c third proof is that an animal never regrets having done this 8 or that, nor docs ir retract or correct anything. This shows chat in the animal there is just one principle of action inasmuch as no conflict is ever present. As its proper end, certainly, corporeal life moves. So nothing else is properly present in the animal except the corporeal life because it moves. 
The fourth proof is that, as we said above, in the works of ani-9 mals of the same species no diversity occurs. One spider docs not weave a web any diffcrcncly from another. Swallows roo all make similar nests, and individual swallows in successive years make them in the same way, just as all fire hears in the same way, every 
39 


stone descends in the same way, and every plant sprouts alike ac• cording to its species. Each thing's nature indeed is a certain form attached to it and a certain power planted in it from the onset; and by way of this nature that is always one and the same issues an ac• tion that is always one and the same. Therefore the soul of ani• mals, having followed narurc's instinct, preserves the familiar tenor of their species. The same happens to us whenever the reason is lulled asleep and we live at the whim of the senses and the phantasy. Bur when the reason has been roused and quickened we take time ro deliberate about what needs doing and we condemn the pull of the phantasy; and we act otherwise than the narurc of external bodies or ofour members demands. And whenever we in• dulge them we are sorry and we try to remedy it; and often we master and subject the body's nature. For we act nor only through chose images accepted or conceived from the objective presence of bodies, but also through things' universal species and rational principles which arc partly present in our thinking soul and partly produced by its peculiar force. Herc the principle of acting is our form, nor the body's: it has been produced by us, nor accepted from the body, and procreated according to the measure of the soul rather than of bodies, and it is common to infinite modes of acciviry. Therefore we are nor constrained by one mode of acting bur rove freely through all modes. For we have in our mind a ccr• rain universal model of things good, and when we compare indi­vidual instances co it, whether we reject them or approve them more or less, it is nor because we ourselves have been drawn by things themselves or by the body, bur rather because we arc draw• ing things themselves to che model and the body to the mind. Thus even when the condition of things and of the body scays [ unchangingly J the same, we often choose differently, now in one way, now in another; and when it changes ro something different, we often choose in the same way. Or rather, in the same moment, almost, and on account of the various options proffered by the 
41 


rc:ison, and even :is the corporc:il conditions remain the s:ime, we arrive at various and in .t w:iy contrary choices. For we dcliber• arc in order to subjug:ite, nor our soul ro things, but things ro our soul. 
Certainly, as Plotinus often says and Proclus reaffirms, we have 10 proof of chis m:ittcr in the sciences and in morals." In the sciences :is follows. \Vhcn we arc content with medicating alone on the truth, having no conc:ict at all with rhc body and nor yearning co do anything external, is there anyone who cannot sec char our con• tcmplarion is utterly independent of the bodyr And in morals in this respect. \Vhcn we direct all our life's attention to adorning our rational soul with virtues, is there anyone then who cannot grasp char the goal of our duties and offices is the soul, and thus that rhc principle of these same offices is the soulr The principles ofthese actions arc nor chc humors, because rhc humors never in• duce [usJ to do anything contrary co the body they arc in, or any• thing over and beyond bodies; and they arc not the heavens which move rhe body, far removed as it is from the heavens, through chc humors. The heavens do not move our four humors until they have first moved the four clements, and they will not move our soul unless they have first agitated chc humors. Bur chc rational soul is opposed ro rhc agitation of chc humors: intent on mcdica• tion, it scorns their onslaughts; it hems them in by its devotion ro ethical behavior; and it shatters chem by its art and industry. No one was naturally more inclined co love than Socrates, 32 or co lust and drunkenness than Alciphron of Mcgara,ll bur no one emerged more continent chan they as a result of study. Didn't Xcnocratcs, Demosthenes and Clcanthcs overcome with their dili­gence their natural impcdimcntsr34 If we resist the humors, we arc opposing both the clements and the heavens, or rather if we arc not subject co the heavens, much less arc we subject co other bodies. 
43 


That man's thinking soul is nor subject to the heavens is obvi• 11 ous from rhe face rhar he uses knowledge in the first instance ro foresee future events, and then either prudence to avoid them or magnanimity to account them as nothing (as though they per· tained, nor to man himself at all, who is rational soul, but to rhat soul's prison). Moreover, through temperance man makes happy use of a prosperous fortune, and through endurance best use ofan adverse fortune, to the extent chat he can profit from boch equally ro live virtuously in health and safery. But how can he who stands above misfortunes either follow them, or endure them by necessity when he deploys diligence co avoid chem, or naturally dread them when frequently he spurns rhem~ How is he shackled by good things when he turns rhcm to his own happiness, or vanquished by bad things when he converts the bad into the good. or con· strained by some necessity, when, living freely by virtue of his pi-cry in accord with the divine will, he takes even those things which are necessary and apparently terrifying and renders chem voluntary and of little import? 
The same point can be demonstrated by way of the intellect 12 and the will. First by way of the intellect. The heavens' body has a single corporeal form in space and time. Bur the form by which all mind understands is incorporeal, universal. and absolute. So this docs nor derive from the heavens. For a form confined to a partic­ular place docs not generate an absolute form. Thus rhc heavens do nor beget any form in rhc intellect. Do they perhaps beget un­demanding in it~ Nor at all. For understanding follows the form of rhe intellect. Therefore whar cannot bestow form will nor be­stow understanding. Bur no body through its own form ever un• demands anything ar all. For such a form is entirely particular. Much less will ir generate understanding in another. Since, there· fore, intellccr derives from rhc heavens neither its own action nor its principle ofaction, it is nor subject ro rhe heavens' body. This is especially because our rational soul, by virrue of the power by which it is united with those things that arc said co be above the heavens, not only is noc subject to the heavens but holds sway over chem. Bue chis soul, inasmuch as it understands the truth, is united with the angels who rule over the heavens. For it under­stands to the degree it has been allotted an intellectual light by them. 

Agreed then chat the intellect is not subject co the heavens. 13 That che will is not subject will be agreed for the following reason. Those things chat arc made by nature arc led by pre-determined means towards their end; hence it is chat they always proceed in virtually the same way. For nature is pre-determined towards some one goal. Bur man's choices opt for various ways to reach their end whether in the practice ofethical behavior or in chat of che arcs. 
Moreover, the members of the same species do not differ 14 among themselves in the natural actions char are the rcsulr of che species. For just as every swallow makes its nest in the same way, as we said, so every intellect understands in the same way the first principles of the arts and of moral behavior which arc naturally known to each person. Every will similarly desires the good be­cause the will naturally desires the good itself. For the nature of man is such that, just as the intellect concerns itself with the prin­ciple of contemplating, char is, with what everywhere is manifestly true, so the will concerns itself with the principle of doing, that is, with the good itself; and all of us necessarily assent to both. But choosing is a certain action tied to the human species like discur­sive reasoning. For these two arc proper co man. n So, if men by natural instinct were to reason discursively, they would all have the same opinion in individual matters. In the same way, if cl1ey were co choose under the guidance of nature, the choice of all would be one and the same. Bue in actuality various men choose various things in various ways just as in discursive reasoning they come to various judgments. So the heavens do not move our will by natu­ral instinct, though they do so move the body. The sense follows 
47 


or announces the body's motion. Hence the will is often tempted. 
But this incitement is not the necessary cause of choice, because 
the will surrenders to it at some times, but not at others. Yet nei­
ther the human body nor the sense is moved only by the celestial 
bodies. For even Ptolemy himself concedes that particular effects 
in matter do nor follow without mediation on [ the motion of] the 
celestials (which arc universal and remote causes), but insofar only 
as intermediate causes bestow them and as matter's mobile dispo• 
sition, having submitted to contrary causes, receives chem, some in 
one way and others in another. 16 Daily our experience proves this, 
and especially in the case of chose things which, though they are 
born at the same time, develop instead according co che nature of 
the species, of the individual, of the locality too and the means of 
nourishment, and of custom, so chat they comport themselves in a 
different way rather than being tied to the same birth moment and 
consequently comporting themselves in an entirely similar way. So 
Ptolemy is right to tell the astrologers to deliver an opinion that is 
common and possible rather than particular and necessary. He 
adds that the wise man can repel the stars chat threaten him and 
favor those char hold out promises.37 
So we should nor believe chose who assert the power of fare, 15 arguing that individual events proceed from necessary causes and that, given the cause, the effect necessarily follows. In the first place, an effect does not necessarily proceed from a remote cause, even if it is necessary, unless the immediate cause becomes neces­sary too. In syllogistic arguments likewise a necessary conclusion does not usually proceed from a major necessary proposition and a minor contingent one. But midway between celestial causes and earthly effects are intermediate causes, the elemental powers, whether simple or compound, active or passive, which are contin­gent and mutable and which can frequencly impede each ocher. Next, given this or that determined and even sufficient cause of an effect, it is nor necessary that the effect should follow immediately, 


often a cause sufficient for the bile derives from A and a cause sufficient for the pituitary derives from B, and rhcy arc able mutu• ally to impede each other. Finally, we cannot trace out the deter• mined causes of all things. You have your own cause for being pale; you have another cause likewise for being a reacher ofgram· mar and litcrarure. Bur you do not have a cause of your own for the fact that paleness and philology concur in you. For if this aforesaid concurrence of the two came from some common and determined cause, the two would surely have some order among themselves. So concerning any effect we will say that it docs nor necessarily proceed in us from its cause, because it could be im• peded by some other cause concurring accidentally. And however much someone has traced the concurrent cause back to the higher cause, yet nobody can trace the intervening concurrence itself back to some cause in order to prove from it that the impediment pro• cecded from some celestial principle. So if the things that pertain to the body do not necessarily depend on the scars, still less arc ra• tional souls and their actions subject to the scars. 
No one should dare to say char men's minds arc moved by su-16 pcrnal minds by way of the heavens as though the heavens were some instrument and medium. For minds accord more with minds than with bodies and so between those minds and our minds the heavens arc not interposed: rather, our minds occupy a middle place between those minds and the heavens. By this ac• count the heavenly beings should move the heavens via men's minds rather than move our minds via the heavens. 
Perhaps someone has declared that our minds arc moved by the 17 supernal minds without an intermediary. Let the supernal minds move us, if you will, or rather lead us. For men's minds will be di­vine if they arc moved dirccdy by the divine minds. For by nature they will be closest to the divine minds, otherwise they would be moved as by some mean by another narurc still closer to chem. 


Certainly chey will be closer to chc divine minds than the heavens' sphere, since they arc moved by chem without the heavens. But if they believe the heavens to be perpetual, then why too isn't the soul of man everlasting, since it is closer to the divine~ Conse­quently, the influence that crosses over from higher and angelic minds to lower minds should be called an illumination rather than a morion. The former bestow in their own way, and the latter also receive in their own way. Bur both arc intellects. So the light that is given and chat which is received is intellectual. Such a gift docs not stop our thinking soul from being turned towards the lighr in its own way, to use it according co its nature, and through ic ro rea­son and to choose freely { especially since our thinking soul occa­sionally rums aside in its decisions towards the worse part); but the instinct of the divine minds would always draw [itJ up towards the best. So our human soul drags che inspiration of the divine spirits down inro its own nature. It thence descends as some­thing stable. Bur the soul makes it mobile, since the soul is mobile itself, and then it acts in a mobile way. So nothing prevents the soul's action, since it is not subject to any mover of its own, from being free. 
Plotinus, Proclus, and Avicenna argue that the celestial motions 18 arc not the causes oflower things, but rather instruments obedient to the divine movers and craftsmen whose various thoughts arc shown to us by the celestial bodies, their figures, and motions, like winks and nods, portending future evenrs. 38 They add that the thoughts of the divine movers arc unfolded, like letters, by celestial dispositions, and chat, just as birds arc believed to disclose to soothsayers and augurs by their flight and chattering not what they themselves are doing but the things they signify, so the heav­ens daily signify to us by their figures and motions what is being enacted elsewhere. The astrologers demonstrate chis when in read­ing the birth chart of someone they adduce a number of things we must rake into consideration which pertain to fathers, uncles, brothers, wives, friends, and enemies, those whose fortune docs not depend on, but is only signified by, the birth chart of another. So if corporcals, as we :ilso showed above, arc neither properly nor entirely subject to the celestial instruments of higher movers, still less subject is rhc mind itself whose behavior and skills, whenever :tStrologcrs predict chem, :ire sec forth by way of signs rather d1:1n causes. This is because the supernal movers consider within chem· selves chose things of which not only arc they themselves the causes but our minds arc chc future causes, :ind often they declare them by mc:tns of cclescial signs. But our mind [along with] the will declares it is not subject principally when it reaches the point of wanting co be alone and under its own control. For chcn it lib­erates itself in a way from the rest ofcreatures and is quite content just wich itself. And it docs so again: (a) when it bends itself in a circle round on its own ace-for a spiritual circuit is not subject to an external end; (b) when it not only wills in response co one in­ference and not :inochcr, but also wills the fact that it c:in equally will :ind not will -in this event it seems to be indifferent equally to willing and not willing and totally bound to neither; and (c) when it chooses chc total emptying ofevery desire-for then it re· lc:tScs itself from the attraction of every special object. This power which destroys all act is subject to no object of its own. But let us explain the whole matter more dearly. 


Whenever some good is sec before us, the thinking soul is :iblc 19 to reason as follows: "Because the gre:iccst good is liberty, I wish co experience liberty at some point in myself. Therefore at present I prefer by retaining the act of choosing to be independent rather than by willing [ some particular action] to be subject to what I choose." Yet the soul is choosing liberty as the good, liberty that it often puts aside in ocher instances because it chooses ocher goods. So we do not necessarily choose any goods, although we necessar­ily want chc good itself. Finally, motion is either nowhere free or free where it is first. The first motion is in the soul. But the first motion must be free if only (because) what is first as such is first through itself. For who doubts chat the motion of action begins by descending from the exact place where the motion of questioning halts in its ascent! But it halts at the command of the soul: for in­stance when I say I am doing chis because of that, and that be­cause of something else, and the latter because I wane ro, and I want to because it pleases me, and it pleases me to wane to because it pleases me. Furthermore, I add that if perhaps I do not want to, I wane not to want to. Plato often calls this being sclf-moved,39 chat is, acting through oneself and freely. Hence he intends it to come abouc: (a) that he who also acts freely might live as a free 


man; (b) char he who lives as a free man might be free from the vi­olent impulse ofany particular thing whether good or bad; and (c) that he who is not shaken by violence might never be destroyed. 
: V : 
Fifth proof: the mind operates without the body. 
The mode of operating follows on the mode of existing. So if the 1 soul exists in any way through the body, it never aces without the body or the body's help. But in fact the opposite happens. So it does not exist through the body. 
First let us listen co Plato's view on how man's soul operates in 2 knowing.10 Since the soul is far more excellent than the body and what continually forms something is more outstanding than wh:u is formed, bodies, whether outside us or within, do not embroider their forms or images at all on the soul. Rather, with their particu­lar qualities or powers or images, they strike upon chat warm liv­ing vapor which is in a sense the knot of the soul and body and called rhc "spirit" by che natural philosophers. For if chose bodies make concact with chis spirit in matter, bur do nor make contact with the soul. it is more reasonable for rhe spirit, not the soul, to be formed by them. TI1e soul is so far from being formed by body that it is rather in truth both the form of, and the formgiver to, the body, the giver of form to its own body naturally and to other bodies by way of art and skill. So the rational soul. the source of all corporeal motions, docs indeed move the bodies themselves but is not moved by chem. It would be moved by them, however, if it were formed by them. But the spirit which is the soul's chariot is assailed by every body. TI1esc blows arc nor hidden from the soul. Insofar as this particular passion or agitation of rhc spirit is nor concealed from the soul, we say it feels. As a result of this sudden action of feeling, the soul's internal power is immediately aroused to perform another action similar to this one. For rhc soul comes into contact with colors through the spirit in the eye, and with sounds through rhc spirits in the cars, and with ocher sensations through the other senses, and docs so wirh the particular power which gives it control over bodies and possession of their seeds in its cognitive no less than in its nutritive capacity. When it docs so, either it conceives in itself anew the entirely spiritual images of colors, of sounds, and of the rest; or it gives birth to old conccp· tions and gathers them into one. In the above we called this power the imagination. Afi:crwards we posited the phanrasy as a lirrlc higher than the imagination, wandering as ir docs in rhc same way almost through rhe images of bodies. Finally, there is intellect, 


which is vastly superior, as we have shown. 
When the soul senses somcrhing, the Platonists say char it is 3 operating through rhc body, bur not because it and the body per• ccivc simukaneously. For just as the soul is the fount of living, as Plato says,~• so too is it the fount of sensation. Moreover, irs ob­jects arc often present to its eyes or cars. Yer if the chinking soul is more acccntivc to something ic is mulling over inside itself, rhcn such objects arc not perceived until the soul reverts to chem. Ir is as though it were not the sense instruments but the inner nature of our rational soul that has the power of sensation. Yet this power of sensation docs not perceive except when the bodily spirit is set in motion by bodies. When it acts by way of the imagination or the phantasy, we say it is acting with the body's help, (a) be­cause it is cycled through the individual images ( which refer to in• dividual bodies and were conceived through the impact made by bodies on the corporeal spirit); and (b) because the bond between these internal images and the spirit is so dose that a vibration of the spirit always follows on the cycling of the images enacted within, and in turn the cycling of the images usually accompanies the vibration of this spirit. When the soul contemplates or elects something through the intelligence, we say that it is acting without the body or the body's help, because even without chat impulse of the spirit, and without che images collected from it, it sees and chooses something totally different &om them. At the moment I will ignore the fact that the Aristotelians put all the powers ofsen• sation in the soul in terms of their origin, but in the soul com• pounded (with body) in terms of their form; but they put the power of understanding in the soul alone.42 For this reason they suppose that the powers of sensation operate through the body, but the power of understanding operates even without the body, and yet that it naturally turns itself back towards the images of bodily sense as long as the rational soul naturally inhabits the body. Several proofs I am about to present will show us that the last operation does on occasion take place without the help of the body, while the prior operations always require the body's assis­tance. 


First proof. The power ofthe soul that uses the body, whatever 4 that power might be, does not perceive its own instrument. For who in tasting tastes his own tongue? Who knows the nature of spirits and images by using the imagination or the phancasy, when that nature can scarcely be known even after the mind's long in· 


quiry? But the nature would be obvious to everyone and very eas• 
ily so, if ic could be known through the imagination and the 
phancasy. 
Second proof. Such a power as we have described using the 5 body docs not know itself or its own activity. Ifsight perceived that it was seeing specifically from the fact that ir was seeing, we would always realize chat we were seeing whenever we saw any· thing. 111is docs not happen. Often we sec a man present in front ofour eyes, but because the soul's inner power is concentrating on something else, we do not realize we arc seeing at all. This sug• gcsts chat this act of seeing is perceived not by the sight but by an inner power when it is not otherwise occupied. Furthermore, the act of seeing and similar acts arc in a way incorporeal; but the senses know only chc corporeal. If the [sensory] powers do not know their own actions, then chcy also do not know themselves. For what is a particular power other than chc principle ofacting in a fixed and peculiar way? So a sense char docs not know [its] ac­tion docs nor know its mode ofacting and also docs noc know its own principle of acting. So chc five senses do not know them• selves. Bue neither do the imagination and the phantasy know themselves. For, since all men always use these two powers of chc soul, chcy should all know, and know with the utmost case, what nature these powers possess. In point of fact however, chose who have spent long periods turning such matters over carefully in their minds hardly know about them. 
1l1ird proof. When something powerful enough to sec up a vio-6 lent disturbance in us confronts these [sensory] powers, it seizes hold of chem co the point chat they cannot well perceive weaker objects either at the same moment or for some time afccnvards. When our eye has been blinded at some poinc by the direct rays of the sun, it cannot distinguish various colors clearly either chcn or for some interval of time afterwards. The same thing happens co the cars deafened by excessive noise or violcnc chunder; and co chc other senses also. The same happens co the imagination and che phancasy whenever they are seized by particularly frightening im­ages. This shows that che action of such powers coincides with the vibration of the spirit and vice versa. It is as though a spider were lurking at the center of its web when the threads arc drawn right and flies fly into it; its feelings and movements respond to the web's every tremor and likewise che web trembles in response co rhc movement of the spider. This shows without question that these powers arc dose to matter, since they are often overwhelmed as it were by an object, :ind the remnants of corporeal passions lin­gering in the spirit for a while confound chem. 


Fourth proof. Noc only is the ace of perceiving confounded by a 7 more powerful object, bur hurt and annoyance trouble us, as though our bodily spirit were hurt. We incur some injury from these (sensory) powers too because of a shared use of the spirit. 
Fifth proof. The senses do nor apprehend a quality and image 8 that is chcir own. The eye docs not sec its own brightness or the image that enables it to see. The sense of couch docs not judge its own warmth, and even if some other warmth becomes its own, it does not feel ic. This usually happens to people suffering from hectic fevcr0 whose sense of touch does not feel the fever at all. The imagination and che phantasy coo have no knowledge of their power, their habitual condition, or the images they have conceived. For the reason scarcely considers these things. 
Sixth proof. After the age of seventy-seven or seventy-eight, 9 when the (humoralJ complexion of rhc body begins gradually to tip toward the terrestrial quality, and when the spirits become dis­persed or else coo concentrated and overheated, then our sight grows dim, our hearing impaired, our sense of smell dulled, our ability co taste less sharp, our couch less sensitive, and our imagi• nation and phantasy lose their customary speed. 
Seventh proof. The senses, the longer they have to work, the 10 weaker they become and the more imperfecrly and confusedly they 
6s 


perceive. If you look at somerhing steadily for an hour, your sight will blur because rhc spirits arc dispersed or lose their brighrncss, and rhc qualities and images of rhe sensible objects you perceive will no longer srand our so distinctly in chem. 
Eighth proof. The senses do not come into conracr with every 11 kind of objccr, bur only with a particular kind. Each of the five senses obviously has contact with its own kinds of qualities; and the imagination and the phanrasy [each] perceives rhe proper con• dirions of these qualities. These and the like customarily happen to the soul's powers using rl1e body, but the opposite happens to the intellect. 1l1us the intellect docs not use the body; but note that the opposite happens to the intellect. 1l1c powers do nor know themselves, but the mind docs know itself. For it discovers that it exists, in what species it exists, and what power it has. The powers make use of certain instruments yet do not know them. 111c inrcllccr has no instrument at all, bur if it did, it would know it, since it knows itself and ochers; and that instrument would be located between itself and ochers. 
If anyone were co claim that the mind has an instrument [as in 12 the first proof above], we would ask him whether it is corporeal or in some other condition. If the answer is that it is corporeal, we would use the Peripatetic argument to prove him wrong as fol­lows. Every corporeal instrument is contained in some species of body through some form proper to it. Ifthe intellect uses such an instrument, it will be unable to make unbiased judgments about corporeal objects. For anything which is perceived by means of such an instrument will be infected by its quality and so it will not appear as it really is, but rather as the instrument is, just as air looks red through red eyes and yellow through yellow eyes. Ac­cordingly, the pupil lacks all color, so chat it can simply and purely receive all colors. Thus the mind's instrument would have co lack every corporeal quality in order for the mind co use ir truly to dis­cern all things. Yer it would not lack every quality if it were a 


body: thus it would have some one quality. Bue the quality it would have, it would not itself interpret. So the mind would not know the qualities like the instrument through the instrument, just as the sense of touch, whose instrument possesses a kind of warmth, docs not feel a like warmth at all. The mind would not even perceive clearly the qualities that were unlike the instrument's quality, because they would be infected by the instrument's quality before the mind could discern them. Finally, if it were using an in­
' strument, (a) which was a body, (b) which was in a particular class of bodies, and (c) which was something confined to a particular place and rime, then the mind would not know anything higher than bodies. It would not even know all bodies, but just one par­ticular class ofbodies, just as the five senses each perceive the indi­vidual classes of body through their individual instruments. Even­tually the mind would not grasp anything universal through its particular inscrumenr. 
Nevertheless, we do attempt through the mind to know univcr• 13 sals when we discover chat apparently diverse objects coincide si­multaneously in some nature, or when we reduce a number of par• ciculars to a single species, or when we compare what is specific and individual with what is general and chus move to separate the universal from the particular. We could not compare these two to• gcther except by w:ty ofsome one power chat comprehended both. Every rime, using right reasoning, we distinguish a class of truly existent entities from every class of body in such a way th:tt we perceive nothing corporeal in the former, we are at the same time rejecting whatever can be called corporeal. But we cannot reject ev­erything corporeal by way of :t corporeal instrument because the instrument at least cannot be rejected by itself. When we contem­pl:tte an abstract species and through it try either to unite our­selves with the abstract forms and principles or them with us, then any corporeal instrument interposed between us and them would be a hindrance rather than a help. It would be totally different 


from them and very much inferior, and produce separation rather than union. 
Given this situation, the mind cannot use any corporeal insrru-14 mcnt. Bur what about some other kind~ Absolutely nor. For if somebody were co attach some other instrument to the mind, we would ask whether without it rhc mind can understand anything or nothing. If ir can understand something, then it docs nor need the instrument. Bur were someone to argue ir cannot, we would maintain to the contrary char it can. For everyone acknowledges char the intellect knows itself and in this knowing docs not use an instrument ar all. For if rhc mind did use an instrument ro know itself, then rhar instrument would inevitably intervene between the mind and rhe mind's essence that was comprehended by rhe mind through the instrument. In that case, something external ro rhc mind would be closer to the mind rhan the mind's essence. But when the mind's potentiality reflects on its potentiality or its acr on its act, no instrument intervenes. Ordinarily, rhc reason for positing an intermediary is rhar it is compatible wirh the two ex­tremes. Bur no instrument is more compatible with poccnrialicy and act than potentiality and acc. Everyone also admits char if the intellect had an instrument it would not be ignorant of it. For we arc obviously nor ignorant of rhc instrument in that our main as• sertion is char it exists and additionally char it exists to serve the intellect. Moreover, if rhe intellect knows both itself and external objects, ir must of necessity at some point know the instrument too by means of which, in rhc process of understanding, ir passes our of itself into rhe objects. Furthermore, when rhc mind reverts to its act by way of the objects it now knows, and then by way of the act reveres co its power and substance, is it not compelled in chis process of reflection co come into contact with its instrument coo if ir has one, since it would be the intermediary between the 
act of the mind and its power~ In which case it is compelled ro know its instrument. Bur docs the mind know or not know its own instrument through some instrument? Ifit is through an­ocher instrument, chen I sha11 inquire about rhac ocher and about another ad i11Ji11itum. Ifit is not through one ac a11, then it docs not need an instrument for knowing, since it (now] knows the instru­ment without an instrument. What is ca11ed an instrument is in face an object rather than a means. And if, in the process ofknow­ing, the mind were to proceed from one instrument to another, chen it is moving, not from a means to an object, buc from a prior object to a posterior one. 


Bur perhaps someone will argue chat che mind gees to know the 1; instrument not through some ocher instrument bur through the instrument itself [as in the second proof above]? Bue I will ask whether ic does so through the instrument's essence or its image? Noc the first, because the mind would a1ways know ic, since ic is always linked with it in che same way. Bue if ic occurs through the image, chen chat which was ca1led the instrument is itself che ob­ject which is known rather than the instrument through which something else is known. And che image itself can be known with­out any mediating instrument because it would necessarily precede it insofar as ic is che mean between che instrument and the soul. So the intellect knows both itself and whac lies outside itself with­out the use of any instrument. Consequently, because we chink about things which are truly simple and about true simplicity, chat which chinks in us, chc Platoniscs conclude, is neither constituted from the intellect and an instrument, nor compounded from the soul and a body, but exists as pure and simple mind. So che mind aces through itself, and chis is also why Plato calls it a self-mover... Thus ic lives through icself and lives forever. 
Let us take up the third proof (above]. The sensory powers are 16 so confounded by a powerful object chat they cannot make out weaker objects. Contrariwise, che mind, when it secs things chat arc noble and sublime, discerns lesser and more trivial objects more distinctly and easily both in and subsequent co the powers: being mighty itself, it feasts and waxes on mighty chings.45 


Lee us proceed to the fourth proof and the remaining proofs 17 (above). Other powers arc shaken by a powerful object. But the mind is not shaken by the consideration of anything, however vast: it is as though it were not subject to a parcicubr balancing of the humors. Admittedly, it discovers the greatest objects more slowly because it is not looking for them, being immersed in unre­lated matters; bur once freed, it finds chem rapidly. Having found chem, it shines with a wonderful brilliance as if totally prepared for chem; and it is filled with an incomparable joy as if it were as close co chem as possible. Who cannot sec in this that the power of the mind is in a way infinite since a finite object never over­comes it? 
Moreover, the ocher powers ignore the qualities and images chat 18 arc part and parcel of them, but docs rhc mind nor know some­thing ofits own? le defines the very state of having as one's own; it secs itself when it understands its own ace; it secs the form by which it understands; and it secs its own habitual condition and power. So the mind dwells within itself. So it is its own domicile. Any object is protected in its natural location, so che mind is pro­tected by itself and remains there always unharmed. Moreover, with regard to natural activities the physically strong always. and the sensual often, arc better off than others; but with regard to un­derstanding they arc neither always nor often so: it is as if under· standing were not the body's companion. Then coo, with age the natures of the senses grow weaker in their operation, but the mind's eye secs more distincrly after the clouds of youthful vices have been put co flight. Plato puts it in his divine manner: '"The power of the rational soul docs not blossom until the power in rhc body dccays."46 1l1e mind"s edge is not sharp until the body's edge is blunted. Then wisdom concerning matters divine is at its most resilient, prudence in human affairs attains its peak, and modcra­
75 

tion and constancy prevail. More importantly, even the power of perceiving, being in the soul. is nor stricdy speaking destroyed by old age or disease, although, if the eye is injured, its accivicy may be interrupted because objects arc nor being represented distinccly enough. For, if the pen breaks, the act of writing stops; bur the writing skill remains intact in the soul. It is obvious char rhis skill suffers no harm at all because, within itself, it continues to write meanwhile; and once the pen has been restored, it writes at will. The same thing would happen if the tongue of a mute or a lame man's leg were healed; and the same if the eyesight of a blind or half-blind man were restored. Ir is as if the damage were in che body, not in the soul. Often after che eye has been bathed we sec immediately. Eicher this would not happen, or it would happen much later after the body coo had been healed, if che actual power of seeing had failed: it would need a certain period of rime to re­cover, since che body needs to recover. Aristodc shrewdly observes: "Ifyou give an old man a young man's eye, he will sec just like a young man. If the senses which are allocated to specific pares of the body do nor lose their power because of damage to chose pares or through old age, then the mind, which belongs co no par­ticular pare, will not fail either when the whole body is damaged or at any time.''" 
Ac this point we can avail ourselves of the argument that Socra-19 ces, in Plato's account, secs forth in che tench book of the &public, co rhe effect chat the rational soul does not die because of any dis­ease of the body. "How will it die of a disease of the body," he asks, "when it docs not succumb to its own diseaset°48 Our body does nor indeed die of any alien disease, but of irs own. Ifit dies from contaminated food and putrid air, it does nor do so until through chem it has first succumbed co its own disease: striccly speaking, it is destroyed by its own disease. If it did nor perish from its own disease, it would never do so from an external dis­ease. If it were nor laid low by a fever, it would not be laid low by b:id food or air. The soul, however, docs not perish from its own harm, that is, from iniquicy or injustice; for :in unjust soul is no less :1 soul and no less alive than a just one. So it docs not perish from a disease of che body. Furthermore, a disease of the body docs not introduce into the rational soul a vice that is the soul's own, because chc soul docs nor become any more unjust when the body is sick: often it is corrected rather and studies to improve mor:illy. 
So a bodily disease docs not destroy the soul or even corrupt it. 20 Bur if the mind seems on occasion to be afflicted when the body is sick, it is not really so. The mind is resting at chat moment per­chance or is active within or tending co hum:in affairs, but it is not afflicted. When Socrates played with children or tended them when they were sick, he did nor give up his habitual engagemenr with higher philosophy, even though he was nor at char moment philosophizing in any way, or nor philosophizing at a very high level when he was distracted from the ace of knowing by the con­sideration of more trivial matters. Our rational soul often sports with itself in the body's pleasures: in the body's sicknesses it gov­erns and cures. In either condition the sublime philosophizing of the reason is suspended or relaxed, since it is either resting for a while or dealing too anxiously with lesser macccrs. When calm is restored, it is revived. Ir has been established by nature that what­ever human power we possess is not enough for us co do several things :it the same rime. Banquet guests intent on their food do not hear well the measured strains of the lyre. When the soul is digesting a large meal in the belly, it abandons chc ducy we have of contemplation :ind so we then seem co be dimwicced. When it concemplaces with heightened accention, its food is digested with difficulcy. Hence philosophers often fall sick in body, bur not in soul; the weaker they become in body, however, the more they ex­cel in understanding. 
79 
So what wonder if, when che body has a fever, the soul aban· 21 dons its contemplating, totally intent instead on ministering to and curing the sick body; or if, when it is preoccupied in develop­ing a child's body or in keeping an old man's body alive, it makes less use of the intellect? And when the brain's black vapors have filled the spirit and, with the spirit vibrating, have set into motion horrible forms in the phantasy so that very nearly the soul's entire power is struck by the novelty of the hideous spectacle and is con­centrated in the phantasy, arc you surprised if ic interrupts its work of contemplating for a while and resumes it only when the vapors have finally dispersed? Often the reason stays alert even when the vapors are boiling, and refutes the images' illusions. This happens with people who suffer from dizziness of the brain: their reason cells chem that the sky or the earth is not falling down, even though the senses say it is. Contrariwise, people who arc shaken by rabies from a dogbitc or goaded by the frenzy of a demon sometimes notice insanity coming on even as the frenzy is rushing upon them. And people who arc terrified in nightmares cry out against the phantasy, often declaring that rhey are dream­ing. So the mind docs not always need the lower powers: often it rests when they arc active and is active when they arc at rest; ic re­proves their chattering and commands their silence. 
Were someone to suggest chat the mind needs the [sensory] 22 powers to be aroused and therefore does absolutely nothing with­out chem, my reply would be as follows. Because the soul, while it inhabits the body, is always preoccupied with sustaining the body and is distracted by a whole host of matters far removed from things divine, accordingly it does not tum its gaze back to the di­vine except insofar as, comprehending certain particularly cxpres• sive images of chem through the subordinate powers it uses most often, it is roused to do so. Once the soul has been sufficiently converted to things divine, and become through repeated conver­sion suitably prepared for the infusion of the divine, for chat con­
81 
temp!ation it no longer needs the service of those powers. Rather, it lulls them to sleep as best it can in order not to be hindered by them. le would gladly remain in chat condition forever except chat the necessity of looking afi:er the body oppresses ic. This means that the mind can continue contemplating by itself, and when it is no longer hindered from contemplation by the need to look after che body, ic will contemplate freely by itself :ind without rhe minis­try of the other powers (it was enough beforehand not to be im• pedcd by them). However, as long as iris encased in the body, and because of the senses' ministry which prepares it for conversion, chen it happens -when the body has been injured and che spirit clouded, and since che objects arc not represented distinctly and no dear perception exists in the senses and phantasy-that che mind is not easily aroused thence to true contemplation. 
Ir also happens chat some people seem more clever than ochers 23 bec:iuse of chc diversity of their spirits, although I think the difference in learning skills between people should be acrributed to the diversity not so much of the intellect as of che will. For every person can achieve che things which matter most if he tries dili­gently. Moreover, it happens th:it some people arc called mindless because they do nor use or they abuse their mind, since in chem the soul's whole attention is totally preoccupied with che more vio­lent illusions of che phantasy. But once they have voided their black or yellow bile (which supplies the cause of illusions), they immediately come co their senses inasmuch as they have not ycc lost their mind. I pass over the fuct char Origcn and Plotinus argue19 chat human souls arc in a way minds that have somehow lapsed from their purity; having fallen from their mind's concen• rration on che ideas down towards a concentration on the lifc-giv• ing power ofbodies, they have descended into bodies. And to the extent some have been converted cowards matter more attentively and profoundly th:in others, the less, they say, they retain of the intellectual light. Hence arises chc huge diversity of inccllccrual 
83 
• BOOK IX • CHAPTER V •  
ability and moral virtue among souls; and contributing to this  
diversity is the fact that rhe aethercal bodies of souls arc adapted  
to the different figures and constellations of the heavens. Lascly,  
the variety of guardian spirits leads to the variety of intellectual  
abilities.so  
But if someone refused to concede that souls existed for a time  24  
before bodies, yec wanted partially ro follow the Platonists, per•  
haps he could say that souls, at the moment at least when they arc  
created and attached to the body, arc affected and disposed to•  
wards it or almost so, just as Origcn and Plorinus arguc.s1 Un­ 
questionably he might say that (whereas] some angelic minds fell  
towards lower things, while ochers did not, and of those who fell,  
some plunged further and others less so, yet men's minds, as rhc  
lowest, all incline by a natural instinct and direccly they arc created  
towards the natural part and bodies, and some immerse them•  
selves more deeply than others in Lethe's scream, chat is, in matter.  
In chis regard Pamphilus seems co have corrected Origcn insofar  
as he could.s2 Bur I shall deal with this matter elsewhere. Let us  
return co rhc subject in hand.  
If someone appears to lose his memory from a head injury, the  25  
Peripatetics will respond char rhc images kept in the cerebral spirit  
arc thrown into confusion, but char the species themselves that are  
in the mind are not really damaged; rather, one might say they arc  
at rest. For as long as the mind inhabits the body, of necessity it  
docs not gaze upon the species of incorporeals without the images  
of corporeals. Plaronisrs will add char, co rhe extent the soul's ar­ 
renrion is fiercely preoccupied with the cure of rhe injured pare,  
then cognition and memory are relaxed or suspended. Avicenna  
and Algazcl will maintain char a mind turned towards lower mat·  
ters is turning away from some divine mind upon which, in their  
view, every act of understanding continuously depends.53  
Since Lucretius does nor believe in immortality, however,  26  
mainly on the grounds that, with the approach of death, the ratio­ 
85  

nal soul's powers seem ro fail.S~ we must note that the life of the body consists ofa tempering of moisture and of hear, and that the body dies when either rhe heat disperses the moisture or chc mois­ture extinguishes the hear. Now since moisture is che food ofheat, and heat the vehicle of spirit, and spirit the reconciler of soul to body, it follows that when moisture gradually dissipates in chc body's limbs, che soul too will gradually abandon chem. Ac char time, since ir is less occupied than usual with governing the body, it gathers itself into its own mind and perceives mysteries and foretells future events. So ler us not share Lucretius' suspicion that the soul will die with the body, the soul which gees stronger when chc body weakens. Since union is the opposite of dissolution, the soul muse be considered most distant from dissolution at the time when ic most gathers itself into itself, and, having case off its ani­mal nature, ascends into its mind. This is clearly what happens in the deach chat occurs because of release. Bur during the death char occurs because of extinction, the soul's life-giving power is intent on curing the humors and [their] commorions,55 rhc senses in as­sessing pains, and the phanrasy in gazing on che images excited by rhc humors' vapors. For a while, therefore, reason docs noc do its duty, as is sometimes the case in sleep. Bur after the din and rumulc56 of death, it resumes its office, just as it customarily awakes after dreams. 
A proof char at that moment it docs not lose its powers and 27 mental gifts comes ro us from the face chac many people who have been restored co life from the brink of death by the effort of doc­tors never recover their body's powers, or only after a long time; but they do recover their soul's powers as soon as the [excess] hu­mor has been purged. It is as if the body's powers have been extin­guished, buc che light of the rational soul has merely been hidden, like fire under the ashes, instead of vanishing away. \,\!ho would claim chat the exit of body and soul &om life is the same when their return to life is not the same? The body returns with diffi­culry and tardily; the soul returns easily and at once. At that time the soul has lose nothing of itself, since it brings its talents, natural and acquired, immediately back into the light again; and no less so than it used to beforehand, inasmuch as it had then gathered its goods and possessions together, not dispersed them. It had made itself ready, like a snake, to slough its skin and to emerge from its prison-house into the light, alive and unharmed, as when it emerged into rhc light from its mother's womb. But the wise man, when he leaves his body, docs not suppose he is losing part of himself, bur rather that he is being set free from an ex­tremely heavy burden. Enough concerning the sixth proof. 
Now to the seventh proof. The senses get tired when they 28 work for a long rime, but never the mind. The longer you look at something, the less distinctly you sec it. The longer you study something with your intellect, the more dearly you understand it. All the work of the body and the senses becomes exhausted wich use, but the mind's work is strengthened. Nevertheless, the head usually becomes heavy with prolonged thinking and the eye is dimmed, because movements in the phancasy very often accom· pany mental exercise, vibration of chc spirit accompanies these movements, and injury of the brain or eye accompanies this vibra• tion. But the cutting edge of the mind becomes quicker and sharper; and it would certainly continue uninterruptedly to direct its thoughts upward if, out of pity for chis body encrusted co it, it did not interrupt its proper cask for the sake of reviving the body. This is very obvious with people who, when they arc contemplat­ing something particularly intently, become annoyed chat the body is tiring. In them the mind is unwilling in a way co halt its work, bur the body and the senses are very glad to. Ir is as if the mind were not exhausted by working, bur that they were. But what is never wearied is also immortal. 
The eighth proof is chat the ocher powers arc appointed to a 29 particular class of objects, but the mind to none. For in rhc num• 
89 

ber of those things purported to exist what cannot be the object 
of the mind's eye? The mind comprehends in a description the 
essence, being, nature, and power of that which is called an entity. 
But all that exist are contained under these. It discovers che 
difference too between being and not-being, and so has knowledge 
of both; and in a way it divides being into its parts and sub-parts 
when it establishes all classes and species of entities under being. 
What is more, it ascends above and descends below being itself 
when it puts the One and the Good itself above being, and locates 
matter or universal privation below being. The mind is confined to 
no one class if it embraces all. It has nothing outside itself by 
which it can be destroyed, because in a way it includes all things 
within itself. 
Let us end chis discussion as follows. Ifthe human soul existed 30 in any way through the body, it would never do anything without the instrument or aid of the body. But it does act without using the body in undemanding and in willing, as we have shown by way of the eight proofs. Therefore it does not exist through the body. It exists either through itself, therefore, or through things divine. If it exists through itself, it never abandons itself. Ifit ex­ists through things divine, then through eternal causes it is eternal. 
: VI : 
Sixth proof: the soul conforms partly with things divine, but partly with animals. 
If man's soul gushed out ofmatter, which chey call the river Lethe, I it would never in its activity be joined with things divine that do not Row out of this river. Bue we will now demonstrate chat it is 
91 


joined with the divine in its activity, and even m its essence and life. 
Since we sec that all things perform most effectively when they 2 arc fully grown and perfect in their species, we must affirm that God, being the most perfect of all. is not at rest but active, since activity is a sign of perfection. Or rather, we would not do any• thing ourselves unless God acted: because He moves, we move; similarly, because He creates, we exist; and because He breaches upon (us], we live and breathe.57 What then is the activity of God? It cannot start from elsewhere or be directed towards an• other, otherwise God would be forced to depend on something ocher than Himself. So God's activity is a kind of perpetual rum• ing back upon Himself: through this conversion He takes pleasure and delight in Himself. So He contemplates Himself; and in contemplating Himself, He secs His own power; and in gazing upon it, He discerns everything it can do. So in a single act He simultaneously contemplates Himself and the universe, His ere• ation. In contemplating, He conceives all things within Himself: and in conceiving, He gives birch outside Himself to whatever He wishes. 
Activity for His sacred ministers and celestial spirits is more or 3 less similar. They too contemplate themselves and their works; they also contemplate God and (His) divine works. Certainly, contemplation alone is appropriate to chem, since it is the most perfect of all activities. This is clear even in our own case. Con• tcmplation docs not need either any external material, as making something does, or bodily instruments as the senses do. Nor is it initiated from without or directed towards another like ocher ac• tivities; nor docs it give shape to alien material, but cultivates and embellishes the mind. Since it is not determined by another, but comes to rest in itself. contemplation is not rapidly exhausted like other activities, but remains unwearied. Nor docs it become irk• some and wanting as the other activities do, but is effortless and abundant and filled with incomparable joy. Ifany one activity from those present in us should be conceded, therefore, to the powers above, assuredly contemplation, the most blessed of all activities, should be granted chem. Hence it is obvious that in contemplation man's soul is in harmony with things divine. 


We arc not in doubt either that in nutrition and sensation and 4 in our body's feeling we arc also in harmony with the animals. But specific activities directed at objects in harmony with themselves require particularly harmonious powers and substances. The pro• portion of one object to another is the same as the proPortion of one activity to another. This goes too for the comparison of power and essence to Power and essence. So just as with us, insofar as it pertains to the use of the body, we have an activity in common with the animals, one directed cowards a common object, so obvi• ously we share a common nature with chem. This nature is the ac• tivity of nourishing and sensing, and it and rhc power and com· plcxion of the body, which exist in us as they do in the animals or almost so, are perishable. But in us a power and substance has co be found which is also common with things divine. From it is born rhc activity which we have in common with chem and which is directed cowards an object common to us and co them. There­fore, just as in us, in a way, the nature of nourishing and sensing and the corPoreal complexion arc perishable, being concerned with perishable things and shared in common with mortal animals, so the power of contemplating will be immortal, being concerned with immortal things and shared in common with the immortals. This is because the same activity cannot begin unless ir proceeds from the same nature and power. For who can doubt char our con• templation is very similar to chat of divine beings, since through it the rational soul. like the souls above, considers both itself and its works, and also examines the higher causes and their effects, and ascends from chc lower effects up through the intermediary causes all the way to the supreme cause, and returns in a circle from the 


supreme cause down to the lowest effects~ In chis it seems to em­brace the whole sequence of rhe divine creation wirh a power one can only call divine: it ranges across it like some god. The soul shares nor only understanding bur rhe will as well with rhe divine spirits, for it aims at their blessedness. It has moreover a similar acciviry in rhac ic acts freely and gives commands co its own body almost as they do. The conclusion from all this is that our rational soul is proximate to the divine beings in essence. If it has an es­sence in common with and closest to theirs, and they never origi­nate from matter, it follows that our soul coo docs nor derive from a material origin at all. 
Furthermore, if those spirits arc eternal, since they move the 5 world's spheres always in the same order and never tire, it follows char the mind's essence must be everlasting, because a life that is limited and changeable is in no way akin to the unlimited and un­changing life. Bue rite mind accords with these spirits more in rhe immorraliry oflife than in the understanding of truth or the long­ing for blessedness; and it docs so to the degree that life itself is prior co understanding or the will. If the will is the striving of un­derstanding, bur understanding the topmost summit of che ma­ture life, then rhe rational soul cannot be directed to right willing except through true understanding, and not directed co chis un­demanding except through rhe true, the already matured life. le has right will because it secs its course for the prime and universal good; and it has true understanding borh because, as understand­ing, it cannot err, and because it possesses within itself che true ra­tional principles of all things (as I will show elsewhere). Therefore it necessarily possesses the true, the fully developed life. Such a life is not exposed co death. 
Origcn offers valuable support co chis argument of ours when 6 he says: "All natures which are participants of che same principle are mutually alike, just as eyes, because they arc all participants of light (as they all naturally turn cowards che light in a similar way), arc all alike; and yet one may be sharper than another because it participates in the light diffcrcndy."sa All rational substances par• ticipatc in God since they all tum towards God, and thus they arc similar both to each ocher and to Him. Thus, just as the highest rational substances, like angels, are immortal, so too arc the lower ones like souls. They arc all immortal because they arc all most similar to immortal God. The conversion itself to God manifests this likeness: angels turn back towards Him like the higher scars cowards the sun, but the soul turns like che moon cowards the same sun. Though che soul may change with che particular chang• ing of che divine light and so receive it in a changeable manner, nonetheless it perceives it with its imperishable reason, since it comprehends both imperishable being itself and why it is imper· ishable with reasons chat do not change. 


: VII : 
An objection from the Epicureans and its rebuttal. On the tempering ofthings. 
Dicacarchuss9 or some Epicurean will batclc these arguments as 1 though che view that anything is partly incorruptible and partly subject to corruption is a kind of monster. But we will affirm chat without rhis [duality] the order of nature cannot be preserved. 
Some bodies are totally free from all corruption, like the heav• 2 ens, of which neither the sphere itself nor any lesser pare is cor• ruptible. Other bodies are the exact opposite, that is to say, they arc completely perishable, like wood, stones, metals, and the rest compounded of the four elements. Various bits of timber will eventually roe and then the whole thing will cease to be a piece of wood (although any such compound does at lease consist of the corruptible and rhc incorruptible precisely because it contains in itself prime eternal matter bur perishable form; so the combina­


tion of mortal and immortal is neither impossible nor unusual ­
but Ice us return co our line ofargument). There arc also inccrmc· diary bodies, namely the four elemental spheres, that arc partly corruptible and partly incorruptible. The sphere of an clement taken as a whole preserves its form or species, its position, and its steadfast course. Bur various parts of it at any given moment arc being destroyed here and restored there. Since bodies have been constructed by spirits or for the benefit of spirits, their order should proceed from the order of spirits or at lease imitate the spirits' order. Some spirits arc completely immortal like the angels, whose entire substance itself does not change and neither docs any [ofits) power or even activity. Ocher spirits arc completely mortal, it is commonly believed; namely the souls of animals, whose pow­ers and activity changes, and whose entire substance changes. 
Moreover, there have to be spirits char come in between rhe two so that the fabric of all nature may be uninterruptedly one. These will remain rhe same in their substance as a whole, but particular parts will be changed. Such, preeminently, will be our souls: the contemplation, will, and action they share wirh the heavenly spir­its demand that their substances be eternal. But the activity they have in common with the animals, entirely enslaved as it is co chc care of the mortal body, cells us char at some point some of their powers or activities will cease. Since natural desires arc rooted in their own natures, and diverse desires rooted in diverse natures, but since we sec char our souls have a desire for things eternal and a desire for things temporal as well, then properly we declare chat rhey arc compounded from two natures, the eternal and chc rem• poral. Analogously, were we to see some body naturally moved up­ward and downward in almost equal measure, we would say chat it is compounded almost equally ofgravity and levity. 


We see chree bodies then and chree spirits. Let us now accept 
3 chree species of living creatures: (a) creacures chac are everlasting in soul and body alike, like che spheres of the world and the stars animated, so Plato believes,60 in such a way that chcir body and soul are both remote from deach; (b) creatures thac are subject to deach, in soul as in body, like che animals; and (c) let us interpose between chem men who arc immortal because of cheir soul, buc mortal because of their body. Many people would also interpose a host of demons and of heroes like them. The order of nature cannot be maintained unless we grant a completely incorruptible body to the celestial soul, which is well-nigh completely immuca­ble, and a completely mortal body to che animal soul, which is en­tirely corruptible. But to the soul of man, which is simultaneously both immortal and partially mutable, can be given a twin body, one aechereal according to Plaro,61 and the other elemental, so thac man's soul ( the part of ic which is immortal) can descend from heaven clothed in the aethereal and immortal body, buc char che soul on earth (the part thac is mutable) can be dressed in the mu· table body of the clements. 
Harmonizing with man's soul, although immortal, there is 4 properly then a corruptible body: ic harmonizes by way of chat 
p:m of it wherein it is demonstrably mutable. So nothing stands in the way of the possibility of our finding a single creature in the order of nature chat is compounded from an immortal soul and a corruptible body. Clearly man is such a creacure as the proofabove has demonstrated. Anaxagoras's opinion confirms it: he posits four universal levels: immortal eternity, immortal time, mortal eternity, and mortal time. I chink the first is mind, che second heaven, the third rational soul, and che fourth irrational soul. Hence chat divine saying about man: "Morral eternity, he pos­sesses a part of God."6z It calls man "eternity" because of the soul's substance and because of understanding, and yet "mortal" because of the mutable part or action of che soul and because the body is compounded of clements. Pl:iconiscs do noc chink ic absurd char mobility of action occurs in che soul along with immutability of substance, since these two do m:tnifcsdy occur together also in che heavens, which bear the im:ige of soul; for among bodies we find nothing more subject co change than rhe heavens and yer nothing more stable. They chink char the world's prime matter is also like chis, being subject co natural forms as our mind to divine forms. However, rhcy hold that change in things is concingenc upon their plurality in th:tr chose char h:ive a mulciple essence :ire allotted mo­bility in ( chat J essence, while those that have power and action alone [not multiplicity] sustain some mutation only in them. 


Bue to conclude chis chapter. Nothing prevents a dcscrucrible 5 body from according with a soul although it is indestructible, par­ticularly since they call even che he:ivens' body destructible in char it consists ofextended pares and so cannot keep itself together bur is linked by chc power of [its] soul. TI1c same would have befallen us, if, like the celestial souls, our souls had nor departed from rhe unity divine. 


BOOK X 
: I : 
First proof: as the last in the order ofbodies is incorruptible so is the last in the order ofminds. 
Since the order ofbodies is subordinate ro and depends on the or-1 der of intellects, the order of bodies therefore follows the order of intellects cxaccly as the footprint follows the foot and the shadow its body. So whatever order we witness among bodies such, or nearly so, we must suppose among intellects. 
We sec that the highest body in the order of bodies, namely 2 heaven on high, naturally contains all the powers for producing all the forms, and uses these powers, which are active and productive, co prepare the lower bodies to receive various forms. So it vari­ously moves and forms the lower bodies by the various powers of its own nature and by the various configurations of its own mo­tion. Consequently one could fairly say chat the highest heaven en• compasses the forms of the rest of the bodies either in ace or in its active power. We can maintain, however, that subsequent bodies are subject co char heaven insofar as they possess those same forms in a power char is, so to s~. receptive or passive; and they re• ceive them from that heaven in act. But the enduring order is such that the higher a subcelestial body is, the more it has of the active power and the less of the passive. For what is closest to the first is sustained by and submits to the first alone [hutJacts on the many. What is located on the level following submits still more and acts less because it is now subject to the two, the first and the second. It showers what it has received upon those succeeding it, until one comes to the lowest kind of matter, which, since it receives from all above it, gives to none. So it possesses all forms in the passive power, receiving chem passively, one after another, from chose above it. Bue ir possesses none in the active power. 


Suppose che same in minds. Their principle, God, has all the 3 intelligible species in one ace proper to Himself: He gives chem co all, and He receives them from none. TI1c minds chat succeed Him receive chem all from Him and arc mutually disposed in such a way that a higher mind distributes, as it were, the ideas and the [ accompanying] light to the lower. So the higher the mind is, the more minds it presides over and the fewer it is subject to. So in re­ceiving it is acted upon by fewer minds, and in distributing it acts on more. TI1e lowest mind muse be such char it is the opposite of the first principle of minds: it receives from all and gives co none and according to its nature possesses rhe ideas in rhe passive power bur has none in the active power, since it docs not transmit the ideas to any intellect subordinate co itself. In the first [intellect] the power of ideas is active only; in the minds that follow, it is both active and passive in turn; in che lowest mind, it is passive. So God governs rhe order of rhe first heaven, rhe intermediary minds the alternation of the succeeding bodies, and the lowest in• tellecr the position of the lowest matter. TI1rough its nature the lowest inrellect receives in ace or secs all che intelligible reasons in succession: it cannot gaze upon all of chem in ace simultaneously, just as matter receives the forms of bodies one upon rhe ocher in succession. 
This matter, because it is not created from any preceding mat• 4 cer, therefore requires an infinite creator, and so is created by or proceeds from God alone. Ir is proper for simple potency co come from simple ace, which, since it extends its action beyond che ac• tions of all other agents, alone makes the matter char is on the lowest rung in nature. If God alone creates the matter char is the lowest of bodies, He alone creates rhe mind char is che lowest of inrcllecrs. If of all the divine works matter is che one most re· 
109 
I 
l 

moved from God, and chc intcllcccual class is the one chat is clos­est, and if matter is made separately from mind, then a fortiori mind can be made separately from matter. If the lowest inccllect occupies the same rank in the class of intellectual entities as mat• tcr docs in the class of natural entities, and if matter cannot be produced by any nacural object, it follows chat the lowest inccllecc cannot be made by any species ofintellect which is in the intellec­tual class. But if chis intellect docs nor depend on any intellect ei­ther of che same class or even grcacly superior co it, much less can we suppose rhac it depends on the class of natural objects and still less so on marcer. 
It follows chat the lowest mind docs nor emerge from matter 5 and it follows coo chat it is incorruptible. For, since the order of minds is superior to the corporeal order and chc corporeal order eventually descends to everlasting matter, and since chat matter is never corrupted, who would be scupid enough ro concede char rhe order of minds, which is more stable and divine than bodies, ends eventually in a corruptible mind? So the lowest intellect muse be cvcrllSting as it stands in chc same relationship co chc intelligible forms lS prime matter docs ro the sensible forms. Bur matter is subject to bodily corruption neither through any sensible form, for cl1rough chem it is formed, nor through any intelligible form, for by chem it is perfected. The lowest mind, therefore, is not de­stroyed by corruption in the spirit1 by way of any intelligible spe­cies, for it is perfected by the species; nor docs it perish by corrup· rion in the body through any sensible form, for the mind rules over corporeal forms and is not subject to chem. Nor docs corpo• real corruption cross over into the mind anymore chan corruption in the spirit crosses over into matter. Or rather, if violence in the spirit docs not cross over inro the mind, much less will corporeal violence cross over into the mind given chc grossness of bodies. Or rather, if the corruption of bodies docs not impinge on the matter subject to them, still less will it defile the mind that is superior ro bodies. 


So lee the lowest intellect be everlasting. But what is it? It is, I 6 claim, the human intellect. \Vho doubts that an intellect exists in us, since we cannot argue about intellects except through the intel• lcct's power? The eye does not perceive sunlight except through its own inner light. Similarly, our soul docs not search our or gaze upon the divine intellects except through its own intellect. \Vhat is this intellect ofours like? I do not need to pursue this further be­cause whatever it is like ir will be eternal. For the higher intellects arc undoubtedly eternal if the lowest is eternal. I therefore believe that our mind is chc lowest (and it is a view shared by many of the ancients) because it docs not perform all its actions at the same time but in itself turns from one to another, as Proteus changes forms, and understands them in succession. The moon, the lowest of the stars, similarly changes its light in turn while the other stars do not change. 
Let our mind then be the lowest and be everlasting. Being ever-7 lasting, it always covets everlasting things and as long as it is not troubled by the body it attains them instantly and rejoices in them alone as though they were all members of its own family. But the movement of each thing is natural if it occurs instantly once any obstacle has been removed, and our mind is directed towards the goal most like itself. Since it is the lowest mind, however, it loves the nature of bodies: it approaches it as kin, fills it with life, and takes it under its rule. 


: II : 
Epicurus' objection and its rebuttal. On the chain ofbeing. 
Here Epicurus rashly exclaims, to the contrary, that to have things 1 divine attached to things mortal is monstrous,l inasmuch as he does nor see rhac mortal things cannot endure without che partici• pacion of chc divine and the unchanging. I believe he is unaware that the chain ofbeing has co be so arranged in its pares that, since many different orders of things occur in narure, the lowest pares of each higher order muse always be linked in some way to the highest parts of the lower order immediately subsequent.1 The re­lationship between che aether and the nature of the elements teaches us chis.. The moon, which is the lowest part of the aether and closest to che elements, seems to possess something elemental both in the frequent changing of its shape and in chc variety ofits body's brightness and darkness. Likewise fire, which is the highest element, imitates the heaven it is closest co because it moves and blazes like that heaven. The point is further illustrated by the nat­ural and murual disposition ofthe four elements where che lowest region of fire becomes increasingly damper and cooler as if it were air. The highest region of air becomes thinner and hot as though it were fire. Fire is airy there and air fiery, and they are thus seamlessly joined. The same thing happens with the lowest region ofair and the highest region of water where air turns to cloud and liquefies into water, and water becomes less dense and rises in va• pors like air. Again the higher level of earth becomes oozy and muddy like water, while the lowest level of water thickens into earth and often freezes like earth. 
Below these elements, dense vapors, and smokes arc bodies al-2 ready composite buc still very dose to the clements. After a while they become more solid and compress into sponge-like and porous rocks closely allied to vapors. Next come rocks char arc almost im­



pcncrrablc and glitter like metals. Among metals, iron and lead arc 
closest to rocks, while silver and gold arc more akin co plants, their 
luster and brilliance reminding us of whirc and purple flowers. 
Among plants, the tuber is clearly superior co metals because it 
shows more obvious signs of nutrition and growth, but it docs not 
exceed them by much because it has no order of various parts. 
The noblest trees arc close co animals: they have roots instead of 
a mouth and branches as arms, legs, and the like. Some trees 
have both sexes, male and female, and when planted side by side 
they reproduce more abundantly. Among animals, the oysters arc 
superior to plants only in that they have a sense of touch, bur 
they stay rooted to rhc bottom and arc nourished more or less 
like trees. Many tiny creatures too come to life spontaneously, 
without intercourse, like plants. TI1crc arc also monkeys, dogs, 
horses, elephants, and other beasts that resemble men in their var­
ious shapes, gestures, and accomplishments. TI1crc arc dullwittcd, 
lazy men too who obviously closely approximate to these animals; 
[and] there arc heroic men, leaders ofothers, who arc next of kin 
ro the divine spirits. 
In return there must be spirits who arc familiarly linked ro 3 men and under whose instruction, says Plato, we have discovered the miracles of the arr of magics Uust as certain animals, having learned from men's instruction and being particularly close to us, do remarkable things, often beyond the scope of their species). TI1csc daemons or heroes arc so close to us in their feeling, as in rhcir nature and location, that rhcy arc affected by p:micular turbulent human emotions, and some favor some people and places, while others arc hostile to others. Indeed, the Egyptians maintain -and they arc followed by Origen, Numcnius, and Porphyry" -that there arc many daemons who lift their rational souls towards higher things and many ochers who deflect rhcm to• wards lower things. They assert that the worse daemons arc in the west; chat chose in chc north arc bad too; chat the good arc in the south; and chat the very best inhabit chc case. Higher daemons rule over the lower ones among them, and over these rule ochers whom chcy call angels. Above angels likewise chc Placonisrs locate archangels and above archangels principalities and above principal­ities certain inccllccts, who, by way of a certain participation, arc now called gods, filled as chcy always arc with God on high and drunk with His nectar divinc.7 


If we agree that in all the classes of things the lowest individuals 4 of the preceding order arc linked with and in a way become in turn mingled with the highest of the order chat follows, why can we not accept chat rhe lowest intellect is linked with the highest of the sensitive souls; and linked in such a way char, since the soul (though mortal) has an image of chc intellect (as is obvious in rhe most intelligent animals), yet the lowest inccllccr roo (though di­vine) has a sensitive and animal nature, through which ir bends in an appropriate manner cowards earthly bodies~ This is especially so in char it is appropriate not only for the human mind but for all other minds which arc in some manner impure ro unite with purer bodies. But all rational souls arc impure minds. Though they may be pure souls, yet they arc impure minds in that they arc animate minds, chat is to say arc minds so dedicated to moving bodies that they leave their viral and animate imprints on chem. Bur pure minds arc those char arc minds alone: they do not produce ani­mate replicas from themselves and imprint chem in the bodies they have to govern. 
According co Plato, however, the bodies chat arc pure arc rhc 5 twelve spheres of the world, chat is, rhe eight spheres of heaven and the four elements below heaven.ft Moreover, in these individ• ual spheres arc cerr:iin superlatively precious parts. So rational souls arc present in all rhe spheres arranged seep by step in order of their digniry. But Plato calls the one soul of rhe one machine Jupiter, but the twelve souls of chc twelve spheres he calls the gods in Jupiter's train.9 To the purer parts of the spheres, chat is, the 


scars and planers, he similarly attributes souls chat participate in 
mind, and d1csc too he calls gods. To the parts of fire he allocates 
fiery daemons and heroes, to those of rhe dear air airy ones, and 
to those of the misty air watery daemons and heroes. Finally, co 
the purer parts of earth he attaches minds, which arc called 
human because chcy dwell on chc humid ground.10 Occasionally 
coo, daemons and heroes arc located on earth. He puts countless 
throngs of daemons and heroes not only under the moon bur also 
in the heavens beyond che stars. Bue in all the spheres, besides the 
daemons and heroes, who arc the princes, he places individual 
souls, whether daemonic, heroic, or human, who do not always 
pursue things eternal like the princes, but switch back and forth 
between things eternal and things temporal and change [ their) 
bodies and life, now rising towards the better, now sinking to• 
wards the worse. Consequently, the number ofthe throngs ofdac• 
mons, heroes, and souls is equal to the stars above them. Under 
Saturn, they arc Sarurnian, under Jupiter Jovian, under Mars 
Martian, and so on. I set aside the face that Plato thinks chat 
things arc all in all, bur in earth in an earthly way, in water in a watery way, and in air and fire similarly, and in heaven according to the nature of heaven; and that all arc in the moon according to the nature of the moon, and in the ocher spheres similarly such char each sphere, in irs own way and according to its own quality, is the whole world. 
Bur !er us now conclude the argument. 111crc arc going to be 6 spirits outside the body who arc everlasting and likewise spirits opposed to them inside chc body who arc mortal. So intermediate spirits have to exist who would be either outside chc body and mortal (which is impossible) or inside the body but immortal. The first arc supernal minds, whom they call rhc angels in their utmost purity, and rhcy arc distinguished in many degrees among chem• selves. Opposed to them arc the souls of animals. Rational souls :ire going to hold the midcile position, being :is ir were certain lower angels. There is nothing absurd :ibout an immortal spirit be­ing in a body, since we have even found an immortal body, namely the sky (and each entire sphere of the universe). Or rather, ir seems appropriate that everlasting spirits, in the role of forms, should be present to all the principal bodies of the world, since ev­erlasting matter, mosr people suppose, is present in them all. But everywhere marrer has to be ruled by particular forms. 

The Egyptians' theory, supported by all the Platonists, espe• 7 cially Proclus,11 leads to the same conclusion. They say chat nor only must rational immortal creatures and at the same rime irra­tional mortal creatures exist for rhe world's perfect harmony, bur also many r:trional bur mortal creatures in between chem, not only in earth, bur also in the other elements. So not only do men have eternal souls in a mortal body, bur many daemons do as well, some of chem close to us, others far superior co us, whose bodies come into being and gradually pass away although they live longer than our bodies and more splendidly. The Egyptians suppose chat a sudden descent from creatures char are celestial, rational, eternal, and utterly blessed co creatures char are earthly, rational, yes, bur without happiness and with the briefest of lives, would be inap• propriace. Rather one should descend by way of the levels of ratio­nal souls who are happier and far longer-lived than men, bur nor yet eternal or totally blessed in body and soul. 
Plutarch, :ind his friends Demetrius the philosopher and 8 Aemilianus the rhetorician, assert the same: among the many prodigies which occurred in their day, they bear witness that Pan, the great daemon, along with many other daemons, first broke into lamentation and then died.12 So che companionship of an eternal mind wich a human body though perishable is not the :1.b­surdiry Epicurus and Lucretius suppose, 11 especially since our mind is the lowest of minds, just as the moon is the lowest of stars; and just as rhe moon looks to the sun so docs our mind look to God, 1l1e moon circles the sun so that it variously shines out at different rimes and alters its shape, bur it is never totally deprived of its ability to receive light. Ir has a sort of brightness within and also a darkness. And it has a sort of cloudiness that prevents it from being all ablaze. Similarly, the human mind always shines with the ray of rhe divine sun, but in varying ways; it changes its shape and is never totally resplendent. What shines in it docs not shine our equally: in addition to its divine and rational power, part of it is subject to a cloudiness chat is devoid of reason. Like the opacity of the moon declining cowards the elements, this part de­clines towards nature and the body and is left deprived of light. 

It seems then to be consistent with rhe natural order of things 9 that the lowest mind, though it is eternal, can be joined with a body, though it is perishable. I shall pass over the theory of Xenocrates, Spcusippus, lamblichus, and Plutarch chat eternal power proceeds from eternity itself, not only as far as the lowest minds, who turn back to this eternity, but as far as the souls of an­imals too.14 Numenius extends it as far as planes besides15 and Plotinus as far even as nature.16 But we follow Porphyry and Proclus, who believe chat eternal life and cognition proceed as far as one can find conversion proper to themY For chose things re­tain in themselves a kind of rational principle of eternity chat arc converted to chis principle by its reason and its grace, not only by an outside and common morion bur also by their own particular motion. 
Is not the human body worthily endowed with enough dignity 10 to deserve to receive an eternal mind as its guest~ Undoubtedly so. We should not be upset by the fact that nature has equipped the bodies of animals with every kind of defense and supplied chem with special means for feeding themselves bur has not given them to us. She did nor wish co mar the delicate balance of our body; nor for man's infinite activities ( which attend his infinite process of thinking) could she provide a limitless number of defenses or in• 
125 

struments. However, as Aristotle says, when she gave us a mind and a hand, she gave us all the skills and all the instruments.'" But it was easy for her to equip the animals with finite means of pro­tection in order for them to pursue the actions determined by their phantasy ( which is naturally directed towards a particular end). But we consider char our bodies arc suitable lodgings for the mind, (a) because of their upright shape with the eyes gazing not at the ground but up to heaven as if recognizing it more particu­larly as their native land; (b) because of the utterly marvelous beauty of the body's different parts; (c) because rhc purest cle­ments, fire and air, mightily prevail in us, as the body's agility, its tall and slender build, and its erect appearance indicate; and ( d) most importantly, because of its superlatively well-tempered com­plexion, which is revealed by the skin's delicate, smooth, firm, and glowing softness impossible without the most exact tempering of 
the clements. 
The eagle excels man with its sight, and so do many birds with 11 their hearing and the dog with its sense of smell; but no animal is superior to man in taste or touch. This is quire obvious from the fact that men immoderately give way to eating, drinking, and making love much more than animals do, even though they arc re­strained at times by reason. It is not surprising that they indulge more avidly than animals in the pleasures they feel more keenly. The three superior senses arc at their sharpest when the brain is dry. God has not given dryness of the brain to man whose brain is never at rest, lest if it were naturally dry, or even drying up from continuous agitation, it would dry out faster than perhaps it should. Taste is nothing other than a sort of touch of the tongue. Since touch is the universal sense both ofevery creature and of the universal body, then where it is keenest it indicates the presence of the body's complexion at its best; and especially because, since it occurs in the nerves, which sense poorly when they arc too dry, it signifies when it is keen the presence of the moist sofmess19 which tempers the nerves' dryness. 


Moreover, rhe instruments of the senses should never possess 12 in act the qualities that a sense is about to perceive. 1l1e pupil of the eye lacks colors, the hearing sounds, the smell odors, and the tongue tastes. But since touch is concerned with the four qualities of the clements, it must either lack them complercly, which is im­possible in a composite body. or else be so far from having them in excess that in an instrument of touch no quality obviously domi­nates, bur a kind of harmony prevails with the qualities sup­pressed. Yet it proved necessary for much earth and water to be present in us as a mass: the abundance ofits bulk could then tem­per the far more vehement force of fire and air. We were also given a larger brain and a hotter heart than other creatures: rhe brain so that via our various instruments it might further speculation; the heart so that many vivid spirits would be present in the brain. And the head was put on cop to prevent the dregs of rhe heavy humors from descending into the brain and polluting the purity of the spirits. Also the intense cold and dampness of the brain and the heat and dryness of the heart temper each other and all rhc limbs alike. In man there seems to be the most tempered complexion of all. If it were earthy, like that of most animals. we would be envel­oped by horns, teeth, hooves or claws, hard beaks, rough and shaggy hair, or scales. Bur in fact the human body is so endowed that it is neither prickly from too much hear and dryness, nor stiff or torpid from too much cold. nor wet and slimy from coo much moisture; rather ir is delicate and sturdy equally. 1l1e same lesson is learned from the foods we eat continually, whether rhey be light, sweet, ground up. chopped, pulped, cooked, carefully blended. Animals consume quire the opposite foods. A certain complexion desires certain foods, and whatever kind of foods it enjoys it be­comes that kind. 


• BOOK X • CHAPTER 11 • 
Let us conclude, chcn, chat man is born for contemplation, as 13 Anaxagoras says,20 since in him both the brain and the rest of the body arc so constituted as to serve continually che office of con· tcmplation. This requires a moist softness of che brain and a tem­pered complexion of the body: the former so that man docs not become desiccated from too much chinking, the I.mer so chat he is not distracted from contemplating by the tumulc of the humors. But since the moderarion of our body is so remarkable and ele­vated that it imitates the tempering of heaven, we should not be surprised if the heavenly soul lives for a while in this lodging that most resembles heaven. Yet the soul docs not at first mingle with the flesh: it is brought down through the appropriate intermediate stages, as the Persian Magi tcach.21 First, in the actual descent, it is enveloped in a celestial body of air and afterwards in a spirit generated from the heart, which in us is perfectly tempered and dazzlingly bright like heaven. With these as intermediaries, it is enclosed in the coarser body. It becomes equally close to all three, although it transfers itself through one co another; similarly the heat of fire is drawn most closely co air and water, though it is drawn co the water through the air. Appropriately then, the im­mortal soul is joined to mortal bodies by means of that immortal aethcreal body. le lives in that everlasting home always, while it lives in these mortal bodies for a brief time. In justice, rhe rational soul should be called a kind ofgod, or a star ringed with cloud, or a daemon: not an inhabitant of earth, but a guest. 
Guest, know yourself, know you are a citizen of a heavenly 14 country, a citizen born to contemplate things celestial. Remember, if your end is contempbcion, chat your life should be enriched and perfected by contempbting. But since from chis contemplating the body's life in a way loosens its hold, it follows chat in this very weakening and death of the corporeal life, your [authentic] life grows not fainter but stronger. 


• BOOK X • CHAPTER Ill • 
III 
Second proof: as resolution reverts in natural objects to prime immortal matter, so it reverts to ultimate immortal form. 
The order of natural bodies is so disposed that it descends to 1 prime matter and ascends ro ultimate form, and the closer some m:mcr approaches to prime matter, the better, the truer, the purer matter it is. l11c closer a form is to ultimate form, the more per­fect it is as form. For prime matter is the matter of matters, ulti­mate form the form of forms. 
Herc is an example of what we mean. We divide the animate 2 body into irs limbs as its matter; then each limb into the four hu­mors that serve as the limb's matter; then likewise each humor into the four clements. But [each] clement we divide into simple matter, which we have to reach eventually Iese we descend ad i11ji11it11111, or conversely arc forced endlessly co ascend. For nowhere will mixed act exist if mixed potency nowhere exists. Contrariwise, nowhere will pure ace be found, if pure potency can nowhere be found; and since action rakes its origin from pure act and passion rakes its origin from pure potency, actions and passions will no­where exist. l11erefore simple m:mer must exist. l11is simple mat­ter, which underlies an element's form, is called prime matter, be­cause the Artificer of nature, in creating bodies, first takes this naked matter, and cloches it with the qualities and forms of the cl­ements. Then He introduces the clements into che species of the humors, and distributes the humors into the forms of the limbs. To the limbs He then adds the nutritive species, and to chis the form of feeling, and to chis the form of understanding. 
The intellectual nature is twofold. One nature is so remote 
3 from bodies char it docs nor provide them with life at all. Ir is not 


called the form of matter or of body; and the order of bodies docs not culminate in this, the nature or proper form of mind. In Plato rhc higher angels occupy this lcvel.22 Bur a second intellccrual na• turc exists which is joined to the body and collaborates closely with it in a kind of league. The progression of bodies ascends to it as to the ulrimare form of matter. l11cre arc two termini for this progression, matter at the bottom and chis kind of mind at the rop. If they arc very far apart, they possess mutually opposite con• dirions. Just as prime matter is pure matter and by its very nature is entirely devoid of form though subject to all forms and matters, so the ultimate form, or mind, is pure form, entirely devoid of matter bur ruling over all forms and their matters. Again, just as prime matter is as far distant as possible from prime being and closest ro non-being ( whence Plaro puts ir between being and nothing23), so ultimate form is as far distant as possible from nothing and closest to prime being. 
Three consequences follow from this: (1) chat that ultimate 4 form in no way springs from matter, (2) that it is made by God alone, and (3) that it could remain immortal. l11c first of these re· suits from the first comparison we introduced here, and the second from the second; the third follows from the first and the second. Ir follows from the first thus: if ultimate form is entirely devoid of corporeal matter, which is the origin of ruinous change, it is far distant from destruction; and if it presides over mutable things, it docs not yield to them, nor docs it sustain any bur viral change. Ir follows from the second thus: if rhc terminus closest to nothing docs not proceed co nothing, is it surprising char the terminus most distant from nothing and closest to prime being is never ex­pelled from being or driven into nothing~ Again, the nature of form is more perfect than char of matter, because matter is made perfect and adorned by form. Just as we descend seep by step, therefore, from matter ro matter until we reach the prime eternal matter of bodies, so too do we ascend from form ro form until we arc gradually brought to the ultimate eternal form of bodies, lest the ascent be less perfect than the descent and the upper terminus less perfect than the lowest. It is firring that the intellectual form towards which the whole endeavor of universal nature is striving as its goal should be so perfect and complete that it is far removed from death. But it is nor necessary for rhc intermediate forms to be immortal. Nature deems them apparently of little value, since she docs not choose them for their own sakes but for the ulcimate form. TI1ey seem to be matter's p:irticular prep:irations for receiv• ing the ultimate form rather than existing themselves as the princi• pal forms. TI1e movement and impulse of nature passes through them as conduits. But in the ultimate form nature arrests {its] mo· rion. Rightly therefore, in order chat nature's end may endlessly endure, they will pass from being to non-being while the form will rest in being. However, we assert that rhc whole endeavor of uni• vcrsal nature is directed above all to the goal of being an intcllcc• tu:il anim:1I, in that intellect is present in (irs] body. Only divine action makes it Possible for the intellect to exist in itself, and since this intellect depends only on crcrniry itself, it will be eternal. 


What arc we to say then about some living creature possessing 5 intellect~ The Magi arc in no doubt that it too would have sur• vivcd in its tempered state-as Plato puts it in the Cl,armidcs,H if only the rational soul had persisted in its original, its divine, rem• perance. For all rhe harmony or disharmony of the body seems from it. TI1e Mosaic and Christian law reaches exactly the same. However what the universal order once lost because of the inordi­nate morion of the soul must be restored to ir again when order eventually prevails (in the soul]. Nor just Moses,2~ bur Zoroas­ter,;6 Hermes Trismegisrus/1 and Plato roo,28 :igree on chis. 
Bur of these matters, more elsewhere. Let us now conclude the 6 theme under discussion. Let the termini of the corporeal order both be eternal, the lowest and the highest. 1l1e ancient rheolo• gians supposed char rhc highest terminus and ultimate form is the rational soul, and Ariscorlc agrees with chem in book twelve of his work 011 T'1i11gs Divi11c [the Metapl,ysics], where, in discussing the efficient and formal causes, he says chat rhe moving causes arc prior to matter, bur the forms arc not: "But we must examine whether any form can survive after matter. Now in some cases nothing prevents it, for instance, if soul-not all soul. but the intellective pare -is such a form."l~ In book two of his work 011 TI,ings Nat11ral [the Pl,ysics], he says that the study of natural phi­losophy should extend as for as the form that is separate and yet simultaneously in m:mer.io He means rhis to be the human soul, and all the Peripatetics have interpreted it in this way. But we be­lieve that the ancient theologians and Aristotle ( deploying this kind of argument) agreed with the opinion char, just as a tem­pered complexion is the end towards which all motions and natu­ral complexions arc directed, so the rational soul, co which che tempered complexion is subject, is the end of :ill natural forms. 


Again, the condition of the ultimate form is such chat it is nei-7 cher completely independent of, nor completely immersed in, bod­ies. If it were completely free and never acted through the body, it would not be the form of the body. If ic were completely engulfed [in the body], it would never do :inyching without the body and would not be the ultimate form. For ifa form could be discovered such chat it were parcly joined and parrly not joined co the body, it would be higher than chis engulfed form. Some form must exist such char, between the angelic substance completely separate from the body and never acting through it, and another form completely att:lched to the body :ind doing all things through it (like the soul of :inimals), there has to be :in intermediate form parrly att:iched to rhe body and partly separate from it, so chat it can do one thing through the body and another on its own. All rational soul is such a form, because it rules over che body and contemplates alike. Un­doubtedly the human soul is also such: ir performs che functions of nutrition and sensation using the organs of the body, bur it ac­complishcs on its own the ace of understanding and choosing. Thus the angel is scpar:irc from marrcr both in substance and ac­tivity, and is completely in eternity because it is completely :it rest. The souls ofanimals arc attached to body in both respects and arc completely in rime, because they change in both respects. Rarional souls, bcc:msc they have co be partly accachcd :ind partly separate, and if they arc attached through their substance cannot be scpa• raced through something else, necessarily arc separated or arc scp· arable through substance, because, as we know, they do not origi­nate from matter or from bodily agcnrs or instruments. However they arc attached through d1cir acrivicics, nor through all activities but the lowest ones, and not by force bur by love. l11at is why, ac­cording to the Chald:icans, they arc on the borderline of eternity and timc.H 11uough their substance they arc in eternity, through their activities in rime, because rheir substance is unchanging while their activities arc subject to change. Between what is com­pletely eternal and whar is utterly temporal it behooves there to be something partly eternal and pardy temporal; :ind between what always exists and what sometimes comes into being, there has ro be something char is always coming into being. Such arc the heav­ens, always permanent in substance, yet mobile. Such too is the world·s m:itrcr :ind irs corporcity if I may use the term. And such in a sense is soul. which is always Aowing in its being affected and in its act, though its substance is unch:inging. So it sinks towards bodies, which by reason of their substance arc :ilso in Aux. 


Clearly then such a soul is the ultimate form of the body be-8 c:iusc it forms and rules over che body, bur it well-nigh exceeds the body's nature in char ir is on rhe very threshold; and if it went just a little further, it would leave the limirs of the body entirely. Ccr· tainly ir is much more separated from than attached ro chc body. le imparts to rhe body rhc lower pare or power of irsclf it has in com• mon with animals and planes. Bur its most imporranr parr, which resembles the divine and in which consists the entire rational prin­ciplc of rhc rational soul, ir keeps separate from the body in es­sence, because separate coo in action. Whenever ir acts through the intellect, it directs itself first by a natural instinct to the scpa• rate rational principles; all the Peripatetics admit rhis. But it rums itself towards individual forms attached [to rhe body] in an ace that is nor primary or direct, bur secondary and oblique insofar as it is turning itself towards the images from which it bas procreated the intelligible species_!? So isn't it obvious that the rational power is more separated than attached, since it rums directly and primar• ily towards what arc separate, but indirectly and in a posterior act cowards what arc attached~ Ir most achieves what it desires when it is distanced as far as possible from the body. Contrariwise, when it descends co bodies through the senses, it makes mistakes and is thrown into turmoil by numberless passions. But it cannot be like mortal things if it is deceived and confused by their presence. luther, it resembles things divine, as Plato tells us in the Pl,aedo,ll because the closer ir clings to them, the brighter it shines and the more it rejoices. But every object is at rest when it is in its natural place, but ill at case when it is in a strange place. From this it is clear to Plaronists chat rhe natural scat of understanding is nor in mortal bodies inasmuch as they arc mortal. So very lirdc is want• ing for the rational soul to be completely separate from the body. So it is the ultimate form because no other form of the body is above it, but many forms arc below; and they arc so disposed rhar, in approaching this soul step by step, they arc raised as ir were above matter. 


143 


IV: 
Epicurus' objection and a response to it. On the forms most resembling God.3
• 
Epicurus says thar we arc dreaming when we claim that forms in 1 any way exceed the matter by which rhey arc sustained. He thinks rather that they arc so totally absorbed by matter that it is impos• siblc for any form, even the most outstanding, to do anything be­yond matter. Our view, however, is that all nature's works, as Plato writes in the Pl11/eb11s1s and Aristotle confirms,'6 arc brought to perfection by some divine understanding, which, turning the hcav• enly spheres as its instruments {impelling the celestial chariot forward, as Plato puts it17), thereby forms this lower matter of the clements. Just as in art the form of a work exists on three levels ­first in the mind of the artificer, second in the instruments put into morion by him, and chird in the matter formed from it -so the forms of things, which God generates or creates here on earth using the movements of the heavens as chc means of transmission or preparation, exist first in God Himself, second, in the heavens as in their channels or foundations, :ind lastly in chis inferior matter. le behooves chis matter, since ic is moved thus by chc di­vine understanding, co sustain and display the most precise form of chat understanding. And this in fact is what we sec in nature and the arts. The vital nature of the soul, using its natural heat as an instrument, moves the matter of the food consumed by us and makes it vital again. 111is life imparted ro the food docs nor imi• rare rhc form of chc heat but of the soul. For heat docs not pro• duce life from itself. A painter too uses his brush as an instrument ro trace some form on the wall: the form resembles nor the brush bur rather his soul, which first conceived ic within itself and after· wards brought it forth. Both in nature and in art, therefore, the 


form of the work refers to the form of the agent. But here too we find three levels: we sec one form closer to matter than to the agent, another closer co the agent than to matter, and another in between. 
Consider first an example in narure. The soul uses its own in-2 strumcnt, narural heat, to give a triple form to digested food. For it gives co the food's coarser pares the form of bones, for from chem it produces and nourishes bones. Ir usually gives to chc finest parts the form of the spirit because from chem it recreates the spirit. Finally to those in between it gives the form of Resh and sinews. This natural hear docs all three, not through its own power, but through the power of soul. For in its own narurc it only burns and dissolves, but it is tempered to perform such works through the power of soul. The form of bones is most distant from soul and closest to matter, for no sense quickens in bones. The forms of Resh and sinews arc closer to soul than the form of bones, for via them the senses function, the five senses, chat is, which arc still not very far distant from the body as they can never do anything without the presence of external bodies. Finally, rhc form of spirits is closest ro soul, because the spirits in a way al­ready serve chc imagination and phanrasy, the soul's superior pow­ers. Herc you have an example in nature. 
Now take an example in the arts. The instruments which 3 craftsmen or artists}• use merely have their own nature and shape: they do not possess the beauty itself of the artificer's understand­ing. His rational soul uses chem co make three sorts of product, some being chc closest possible to it, others at the furthest remove, ochers in between. All the works of an artist chat pertain to seeing and hearing reveal his natural genius almost entirely; but chose pertaining ro the other three senses not at all. In concocting fra­grances and flavors or in designing couches and baths, the inten­tion of the maker is scarcely or hardly apparent. But in paintings and buildings the artist's forethought and good sense arc made manifest, :ind :idditionally the disposition and shape :is it were of the soul itself is perceived. For in these works the rational soul ex­presses and dclinc:itcs itself, just as :1 man's face gazing in :t mirror forms itself in the mirror. But the soul :is :1 maker steps most into the light in discourses, in songs, in instrumental music. Herc the mind's entire disposition and will arc most m:inifcsdy depicted, and the :trtist's works usually :trousc in us the s:ime emotional re­sponse :is existed in the :trtist: a mournful word often forces us to weep, :ingry words to r:igc, lascivious words to yield to lust. So these works that look now to sight :ind now to hearing arc closest to the mind of che artist; but those that pcrt:tin to the other three senses arc, as we said, at the furthest remove. In between arc those activities th:tt pertain to bodily exercises, whether recreational or military. 


Whence is it that :trt and nature arc so tempered as to dispose 4 their works in this w:iy unless it is from God who has established nature and the :trts~ Therefore God simibrly so tempers His works in bodies that He coo generates in che m:itter subject to Himself three levels of forms, those closest to Him, those furthest away, and chose in between. Since whatever moves matter docs so for no other reason th:in to elevate it to rhc point of being the im­age of its own counrcn:incc, and since God's judgment can never be deceived, then nccess:irily somewhere in m:tttcr, when it has been set into motion for :1 long rime, the countenance of God the Artist must shine our more radiantly than the faces of other mov­ers elsewhere in other portions of m:mcr; :ind the more so because God is more potent in moving and :tttracting than others. Even­tually then God's countenance must project its likeness so radi­antly inro matter that no comparable radiance can exist. As long as an image is mortal, it is not a perfect and complete image. For it will more resemble God, if it is always like Him, that is, if it emerges :is immortal. So some form is made immortal in matter. Whatever chis form is going to be, it will be rhe form which is the highest, :md which, ac chc furthest remove from matter, being chc highest, is dms che closest co God ;md hence most like Him. ll1c rational soul is undoubtedly chis form. But Ice me explain chis point more fully. 


V : 
A more detailed response concerning tl,e levels ofthe forms. 
In chc beginning God conditions prime maccer in a certain way co 1 produce rhc species of natural things by means of the prime quali­ties, and He prepares [irJ by way of rarity, density, lightness, heaviness, heat, cold, wetness, and dryness. These arc called chc qualities or preparations of marcer rather than che principal forms and species. Because they arc each compatible wirh many species and arc often intensified and rcmicced, and yec rhc natural species do not so change (:iccording co chc nacur:11 philosophers), rhcse qualities often come and go, while rhe species abide. Who would deny chat heat and cold arc common co many species of trees :ind animals, and chat in animals chcsc qualities vary in intensity while chc species of che animal remains rhe same~ They arc chus very similar co matter, because, like m:mcr, chcy arc subject co many species, and these species arc not mutually distinguished only by their presence. Lee chem be called chen rhc affective conditions or scares of matter preparatory for receiving chc species. Marccr, therefore, by way of quantitative extension (which is irs compan­ion and common co many things) opens its bosom co these quali­ties. Prepared through chem co receive rhc species, ic immediately accepts the forms and species of chc clements from the divine mind, the craftsman of rhc whole world. le accepts chc species of fire when prepared through hear, dryness, rarity, and lighcncss; chc species of earth when prepared through cold, dryness,l9 density, and weight; and the rest of the species each accordingly. The forms of the clements are superior co these chcir preparatory conditions in chat either they arc the limits of these conditions, or they dis• tinguish the species proper and in some manner endure more stably. For it is obvious chat che coldness of water changes more quickly than the species of water, and similarly with the rest. Yet these elemental forms arc totally immersed in matter because they arc not resolved into other species or principal forms: rather, di­rectly matter has been affected by way of the qualities, they arc drawn into ics formless lap. Hence because of matter's passive na• cure these forms participate in barely one activity. For what else docs fire do but burn? And the elemental forms do nothing except insofar as, being preparatory scares, they aid matter, because they do nothing beyond what hear, cold, dryness, and chc rest can do. Furthermore, they have only one movement and only one location. Yet there is a kind of ranking among these forms of the clements. For the form of fire, being more independent of matter than the others because of its remarkable rarity, is more efficacious in action and further removed from the stain of being itself acted upon. 


Next, the mind brings the four clements together into one, and 2 from their differing blends makes the various species of stones, metals, and ocher objects referred to as composite. The forms of these composites arc superior co the forms of the clements in chat: 
(a) they are resolved into ocher, in a way principal, forms; (b) chey do not come into being except in matter that has been carefully worked over; and (c) they do something for which the forms of the clements and chose preparatory states of matter do not suffice. For it is not through the qualities of the elements that jasper stim­ulates childbirth and expels harmful phantasms, chat sapphire scops swearing and confers grace, chat emerald quenches lust, char amethyst allays drunkenness.4°For many ocher things, which have similar qualities, do the same. These forms do these things, how• ever, through a power bestowed on such species as these by the souls of the spheres. Yet they arc not far removed from matter, because this kind of power is corporeal and transmitted by way ofthe bodies of the spheres. And though they perform the sort of activity we have described, yet no work brought ro completion by chem using such a corporeal power remains perfect. They also have one motion and one location insofar as chis or chat clement is dominant in their composition. But among these (clemenral] forms the more effective arc invariably chose in whose mixture the purer clements dominate the coarser. 

l11c forms of planes follow. They arc superior because they per-3 form the work of giving life using rhc qualities of the clements as instruments, which the composites' forms cannot do. l11ey propa­g:ue plants like themselves in the same species, which is not granted to the forms of composites. By taking nourishment they move in every direction, contrary to rhc nature of the heavy cle­ments. Those which excel in their mixture acquire a body distin­guished by the diversity of its parts -branches, twigs, a trunk, roots-as though many powers were in these forms which re• quired many different instruments co perform their functions. l11ey also display a likeness to some celestial powers and motions: powers, insofar as they do things for which the qualities ofthe cle­ments do not suffice; motions, in chat they move in every direction as in a circle, and move their bodies from an internal principle just as chc heavens do. Moreover, they order all their members in ac­cordance with some principal end of their own, just as the world­mover moves all the spheres for one end. Yet they still incline coo much cowards the matter of the clements, because they can do nothing without using the forms of the clements in heating. cool­ing, and likewise with the rest. 
l11e souls of animals come next. l11cy arc superior to the souls 4 of plants as they arc like the heavenly nature not only in moving but also in a way in knowing. l11c celestial powers know all things; the souls of animals know something and have a spirirual operation in that the action of the sense and the imagination is spirirual by way of the spiritual images themselves ofobjects. They do not perform the ace of sensing through some quality of the ele­ments, because when they sense something they do nor sense by heating or cooling. And yet these animal forms arc still involved with matter because they use bodily instruments to perform the activities of the senses. They do not perceive anything unless it is corporeal and particular, and they always obey the needs of the body. 
Finally, man's soul is superior to all of these souls, being like the 5 minds of heaven not only in knowing but even in its kind of knowing. For it understands just as they do. And neither the qual­ities ofthe clemenrs nor any bodily instrument compounded ofcl­ements contribute to this activity. This is the clearest evidence chat the narurc of this mind of ours is free from the bonds of matter, since it has been allotted an activity free from any dealings with matter. For matter obstructs the power of knowing as is evident from the fact that the forms of the elements, of compounds, and of plants, which arc neighbors to matter, know nothing. In ani­mals, too, serving the many senses arc those parts to which grosser matter rises least, such as rhe head; and the sense becomes acutest there where the instrument is purer and the spirit most present. Hence sight, which is purer than the other senses, perceives more swiftly and sharply, and impresses the marks of objects more deeply on us. And so through the evidence that comes through sight, we recognize things after the passage of time more clearly than we do via the evidence of the ocher senses. In dreams as well visual images more often present themselves co us than auditory ones do. 
Matter not only impedes the power of knowing, but also the 6 object to be known. When che sheer bulk of things weighs on a sense, we cannot perceive at all or only with difficulcy. Also the forms of things present themselves co us firsc, and chrough them we gee some inkling of matter. Furthermore, we necessarily infer privations by way of habitual conditions, and macccr by way of a relationship ro form. Yee we do not chink of all forms by way of the relationship co matter, and chis shows char matter depends on rhc genus of forms and rhat some forms arc free of matter. Again, we learn about objects mosr dearly and mosc reliably when we think abouc chcir rational principles in isolation from chc condi­tions of matter. If macccr, then, is an impediment both to the power and co the object of knowing, it follows that the soul chat perceives and imagines something is not composed of matter. Or rather, it is not a form divided by quantity, if only because, in the actual process of knowing, a mutual and remarkable union and penetration rakes place between the apprehended form and the ap• prchcnding power. Bue chc dimension of quantity would rorally prevent chis. 
If we conclude, by way of inferior kinds of knowing, elm soul 7 docs not derive from matter, then we can conclude by way of rhe highest kind of knowing, namely understanding, chat soul docs nor derive from matter. Just as what acquires knowledge without marrer exists without maccer, so what achieves understanding without the conditions of matter muse exist far removed from its passions. For if man's soul were rhe kind of form that one would refer co matter as co its origin, it would not acquire knowledge of any forms except by way of a relationship co macccr. But in point of face, as the sovereign of matter rhe soul subjects matter co forms when it refers matter itself ro chem, and, like God, refers the subsequent forms to rhc prime form and to God Himself. Ir rises above matter principally in the very face that it lifcs matter above itself; and ic comes closest to God because ir leads the forms back to God. 
Hence the answer co the question we have been asking for some 8 rime becomes crystal clear. Of all the forms of body, the rational soul rums out co be the most like God; and to such an extent that no other can become more like, inasmuch as no other fonn in matter can be further removed from matter, since this one is perched right on the extreme limit of body. But some form very like God must have been imprinted in nature if the divine artificer is going to rule in any way over matter, as Placo taught in the Timaeus, where he maintains that this form is the mind which is in the body but which has been plucked from the mind outside the body, as though it were a reffection of that mind blazing in the mirror of a higher mattcr.11 Consider how far fire can raise matter to its own likeness and by what degrees. The sphere of fire has three kinds ofquality: heat, lighr, and che levity that always aims at things above. l11is sphere sets lower bodies into morion and im­parts heat alone co the coarsest and least receptive ones, as is the case for the most part with stones. But it imparts heat and light to purer bodies, as it easily does in the case of wood. Finally, in addi­tion to heat and light, it imparts to the least material bodies the levity that lifts co things supernal. It docs this with sheets of paper and with linen in such a way that it immediately assimilates their substance into itself as most like itself. So the form of fire in stone is dark and slow-moving, in wood is still slow-moving but bright, in linen is bright and at the same time nimble. In the same sort of way the divine mind bestows on lower bodies life alone like heat, on higher bodies sense [too], which is like light, and on the high­est bodies intellect in addition like chc levicy through which the soul rises to God. Thus the divine ray penetrates everything: it ex­ists in scones bur docs not live; it lives in plants but docs nor shine; ir shines in animals bur does not reffect on itself or return to its source. In men it exists, lives, shines, and first rcffects on it• self through a sort of observing of itself, and then returns co God, its source, blessed in coming to know its own origin. Just as the as­cent of fire has a specific goal it can attain, and this is rest in its own sphere, so our mind's ascent, directed perpetually towards God, has an appointed goal it can someday attain; and this goal is nothing other than that rest in God, which the rational soul will not enjoy until it has abandoned its abode here. 
VI : 
L11cretius' objection and its refutation. That the mind can act without the body. 
Those two ungodly figures, Lucretius and Epicurus, will roil our 1 current discussion not with any cogent argument, but with their usual clamor. We arc advancing two principal points: chat God creates the soul like Himself, and chat He creates it in matter. Lucretius will object to the first (a) due, if the soul is so divine, it is contrary to its nature to be united with body for the purpose of creating a species ofanimal; and (b) char, if it is united, why docs the mind never contemplate anything when the phanrasy is nor imagining~ To the second Epicurus will object that, ifGod creates the soul in matter, He therefore creates it out of matter, and so it is mortal. We have answered the first objection, and elsewhere we will do so at greater lengch.~2 For the moment we will deal with it briefly in the following way. 
Since the lowest power of understanding in the universe is 2 aroused to its proper work of speculation by the activities of the senses and the phancasy, hue che senses and the phancasy operate through the corporeal spirits, it follows that it cannot be contrary to the nature of mind for it to be united with this body for the purpose of bringing the human species to fulfillment on earth; and especially since our mind is not simple mind but what is called an• imated or cnsoulcd mind, in ocher words the lowest of minds, what gives life to bodies. Even ifin the generic rational principle of mind there is no inclination :it :tll towards bodies, nevertheless in the specific rational principle of the lowest mind such an inclina­tion is included as in a way natural to it, in that the created, ensoulcd mind has emerged on the border-line of minds and souls and is stooping down from it to give life to the bodies closest to it. Because each thing acts according to the manner of its sub­stance, but the substance of the human mind is completely incor­poreal though united with matter, it follows that our mind under­stands incorporeals, but secs them, so long as it inhabits the body, in the company often ofsomething in a way corporeal, an image of the ph:inrasy in other words. Accordingly it usually needs such im­ages. Bur once this body has been laid aside and the mind has re­turned to itself, it will understand in itself. At chis present time, it behaves in one way with regard to the images of the ph:intasy be­fore it has conceived the universal form within itself, bur in an· other way :1fter it has conceived it. Beforehand, it needs the images so it can be excited by their stimulus to give birth to the universal species; if it needs them afterwards, it docs so, the Peripatetics chink, only as a kind of foundation or companion for the species. And in face, following the inrcllccr's command, a new image is of­ten fashioned in the phantasy conforming to chat universal species, :in image in which the mind's universal species is blazingly re­Aected Oust as a model is reflected in its image). 
Nonetheless, perhaps the mind docs not need the phantasy's 3 image, as the Plaronists chink, once it has given birth, at the im­age's prompting, to chat species and retains it as its own. But the nature of the twin eyes ( fixed as they are in the same root or sus­pended from one hinge) is that they open and shut together and look in the same direction. Thus the mind and the phanrasy, the twin eyes of the same soul and next to each ocher, open together and look in the same direction, but each in its own way. When the phantasy thinks of this particular man, the mind thinks of the universal man, and conversely. This concurrence is natural. Yet it is possible wirh rhe help ofa {blocking] hand for one eye ro gaze lt works without the ocher. So coo and with a more ardent zeal. it is possible for the mind to be turned cowards the universal species when the phantasy is inactive; and when the mind is inactive, it is often no less possible for the phantasy via some perturb:1tion ro range more intensely through corporeals. Furthermore, when che soul contemplates itself, it can gaze ar its own ace and power and essence without the phantasy's image. This is especially true when it is lWJrc that it understands, and understands that it is aware, and so on back and forth to infinity; and especially if, as some people chink, it becomes ;iware of its own intelligible species and its own ace through the said species or acc. In this case certainly it would not need an image or an instrument: it is able to judge the nature of the image itself without any other image. 
Bur if someone is convinced that the understanding, when it 4 considers the rational principles of natural rhings, needs rheir im­ages, let us perhaps concede che point for the sake ofargument; in which case just as associltion with particular men attends our hu­man nature, so chinking about this or that individual person ac­companies our understanding of that nature. In the case of divine objects, however, we shall nor readily concede that every time we contemplate angelic essences we have co look at corporeal images. Forjust as angelic essences do not sink down co chis or chat partic­ular matter, so our speculative thoughts, by which we arc made in l w;iy equal in knowing to the angels, arc not bound by necessity to corporeal images. The rational soul docs not borrow its knowl­edge of che angels properly from bodies, but from ideas, either in• narc ideas, when it reflects on itself, or ideas imparted to ir when ir rises above itself. But who would maintain char the mind needs the aid of images in the precise contemplation of things divine, since contact with or intervention by chese images vehemencly blocks the mind offfrom such speculation and often leads it into error; or if it does not want to be deceived, it has to dispel the im­
ages like clouds? 
But perhaps, when the rational soul diverges from itself by way 5 of the senses, it only attains sensible qualities. When it turns back towards itself by way of the phamasy, it attains the non-sensible intentions ofsensible images. When it returns into itself by way of the reason, ir attains the non-sensible rational principles that reach down to the non-sensible intentions. When it rises above itself by way of the mind, like an angel, it :mains the non-sensible rational principles now separated from the imagination's intentions. How is it that the philosophical mind sees in the universe and in itself an angelic and divine mode ofknowing, free from images? First it proves that such a mode of knowing has to exist, and it describes whose it is and what and why and how it can be in itself. And it also attains it formally, and in describing it comes to know it. To be sure, such a description is a conception of the soul freed from any image. For it cannot by way of an image look at and define a mode of knowing free of an image. The mind then turns cowards chis conception while realizing it has already conceived it as image­less. This conversion indeed is even more image-less. Finally it turns itself back to chis conversion again and again, and gradually flies ever farther away from images. 
I will pass over briefly some rather familiar arguments, namely 6 that when the mind, having sec aside individuals, perceives nor only the most specialized of the species, but the middle rank ones too, next the middle rank genera, then the most generalized gen• era, and finally the transcendentals;0 it divides, compounds, de­fines, and adduces. In all this certainly it is not only trying, but be­ing compelled to leave images behind. Ir is important to note, fur­thermore, that the soul's lowest power is more closely linked to the body than is the intermediate power, and chc intermediate more than the highest. When the highest power of reasoning, via the act of human understanding and the will, resolutely gathers itself 
169 
into itself, then che lowest faculty is for the most pare cue off from bodily activity, because at chat time ic usually loses half, or even more, of its function of ruling, moving, digesting, distributing, and purging. If this is so, the intermediate power muse necessarily be co a far greater extent divorced from maccer, as indeed is evi­dent from the face char men abscracred in the midst of concern­plating sense nothing ac all. 
It follows from chis char from time co time the highest power 7 in chis ace [of contemplation] entirely abandons corporeals, and by virtue of chis the rest of che powers abandon them more and more. For in face what is growing up is able at some point co ma­ture, namely when it has achieved the goal towards which it was steadily growing. So che soul's abstraction from the body, which w.:ixes more vehemently as che intention of speculation waxes, is also totally fulfilled by the fulfillment of chat intention. Bue char intention is fulfilled when ocher things have been put totally aside and only che first, che true, and the good arc loved and concern• placed by the incandescent yearning of the mind. For abstraction is then complete and we have accaincd che goal of chis abstraction which secs us apart from mortal things. Eventually there will be, not separation from life, but accainment of the highest life. For chose who keep company on the journey are together at its close. Wherefore the same haven receives the soul in Right from the body and the soul in contemplation. This haven is truth itself. Truth is eternal, or rather is eternity itself. So much for Lucretius. Lee us turn co Epicurus. 

: VII : 
Epicurus' objection and its rebuttal. That God does not make mind except from Himself and through Himself 
Bur how, asks Epicurus, docs God produce this soul in matter un• 1 less it is also from matter~ Let us ask Epicurus in return how docs the sun produce light in the air bur not from the air, a face its re• Acccion in the mirror but nor from chc mirror, a speaker's mind the meaning of a sound in the air but not from the air~ Just as the sun produces heat in the air and from the air, yet light though in the air not from it, and just as a speaker's mind produces sound from the air, but the meaning of a sound though in the air not from it, so God extracts some forms from the entrails of matter, buc He extends the inccllcct, which is rhc highest form, over the face of matter without dragging it from matter's coils. 
Epicurus ought to have considered rhc fact chat matter itself 2 does not have power to give itself form (nothing that is without form can give itself form). It has che power or preparation ro re• ceive form, which we call the inchoation of forms and the :mcicnt theologians call primeval chaos. As the 1i11111c11s reaches, God ap• plies a formative power to chaos, not as the proper power of mat• ter, but as the instrument of God Himsclf.44 To form something He rakes the celestial and elemental inAucnce and marches it to this power. Perhaps the divine inAuencc Aowing from God, pene• tracing the heavens, descending through the elements and halting in inferior matter is chis formative power, which Plato calls the reason of the divine understanding . ..s Through its infusion, the world machine is composed of necessity and mind, composed chat is from the matter necessary to bodies and from the forms which, in a most beautiful order, reproduce the divine mind and its good­ness.46 The Peripatetics variously call chis power God's instrument or nature or the seminal potency. The formablc nature of matter is subject to this formative power. So God uses this formative power, which is diffused through the world machine, to accommodate to matter's own formablc power boch the forms we have located clos­est co matter and those in between. 


Every Platonist will perceive an order here in the four levels of 3 forms and of substrate. Rational souls arc set on fire by God's pure ray alone (shining] on chc pure face of indivisible matter. Ir­rational souls arc brought into rhe light from chc folds, as yet unextended, of m:mcr by both chc celestial and the animate influ­ence added to char divine ray. The familiar forms of che clements and compounds arc led by way of the clcmcncs' also familiar qu:ili­tics out of the lap of m:ittcr, which is now in extension (in cxccn• sion yes, but undetermined by way of dimensions). The unfamil­iar forms of the same clements and compounds arc corn by way of the clements' unfamiliar qualities out of chc womb of matter, which is now in extension by way of particular and determined dimensions. Bue we believe chcsc forms (excepting che rational souls) arc bound to matter because they perform :ibsoluccly no :iccivicy char docs noc involve in some way either chc n:icurc of chc body or :in instrument of it; and they always set themselves chc goal of serving the needs of the body, in char they arc the forms chat depend on body as long as rhcy arc accommodated through che formative celestial or clcmcncal instrument co m:ittcr's formable power. A proof of chis is char none of them is turned back cowards God, and chis suggests that God is nor their proxi­mate cause, but a remote one. But we suppose ch:ir the rational soul h:is been cre:ucd by God without any insrrumcncs principally on the grounds chat it is turned dircccly back cowards God, as we will argue below. So chc instruments contribute, not co the pro­duction of the human soul, but co the preparation of chc matter which man's soul is going co inhabit. Bue once chc matter has been prcp:ired, God on His own produces chc soul. Placo reaches us 

this in his book On Nature {the Timaeus] where he affirms that che 
rational soul is given by the demiurge alone, but that the irrational 
souls are given also by His ministers who assist Him with the 
work..' 
Aristocle too, following his master in this respect, says, in the 4 second book of his work on animals, "When man is born, his in• ccllccc is poured into him from without; and that intcllccr, whose acciviry is not completed by way of something corporeal, is alone divine."48 Ir is as though it were not brought forth from matter's inmost womb, as Arisrode believes is the case with the other forms. So God imparts this form Himself without using any in­strument. 
You have an example in the sun's light and in the soul. The s sun's light uses heat as its means of scattering the clouds and clear­ing the sky. But by itself it illuminates the clear air. Soul uses nat· ural hear to digest food and to prepare it for the form of life. Once the food has been digested and made ready, the soul gives it the form oflifc, not through heat but through itself. Likewise the soul uses the tongue as an instrument ro break up the air. The frac­tured air resounds and its resounding has meaning. That sound is a sore of living creature, composed of the fractured air as its body and of the meaning as its soul. This meaning, like soul, lies hidden in the words we utter: it is the particular unheard life as it were of the heard word. Whence comes the meaning in the sound? From the soul itself of the man who is speaking. Docs che soul give meaning to the word through the tongud Ofcourse not. For the tongue is a body and only gives a corporeal and sensible gift: of itself it does not give any meaning when someone is talking at random and his soul not paying attention. Bue meaning is a non-corporeal and non-sensible thing. Otherwise anyone who heard a voice would immediately know what was meant by the voice, So meaning, which is something non-sensible, comes into being, like a soul in the voice, in the fractured air as its body; and 

it comes, I say, solely from the soul's cogitation and not through the tongue's compliance. When you pronounce the word PLATONEM, the fractured air is divided into several parts-PLA• TO•NEM -that 611 duce moments of time. The meaning, however, is not divided into parts, because in the mind of the speaker it is conceived in a single, indivisible moment prior to its being spoken. And often the word signifies things that arc absolutely huge whose mass it cannot possibly equal in size, and often too it signifies movement and time without itself being in morion or in time. When it is pronounced aloud but only part of the word is pro­nounced, it is not yet understood for the most part by an auditor, nor is it understood little by lirdc. Bur once all the syllabics have been pronounced, he immediately grasps what they all mean. Of­ten the meaning remains forever in the auditor's intellect when the syllabics have passed away, just as it existed in the mind of the speaker before he uttered it, Meaning then is produced by a speaker's soul without an intermediary and is incorporeal. It is the word's simple and in a way immortal soul. But the sound made by means of the tongue dissipates and dies. 
If the sun and the soul can make something in matter without 6 instruments, still more can God give a form to matter without the intervention of any instrument. And that form will principally be the rational soul. which can consider and choose without an in­strument. Itcould never do this if it were fashioned by the work of an instrument. If it is created by God without any intermediary, it is not created by Him unless it is through Him. God is eternity itself. So the soul is created through this eternity. Wh:1.r is created through eternity is eternal. And what is closest to rhc highest stare is so stable as to be furthest removed from mortal ch:1.ngc. For chat is the most extreme form ofchange. Properly then, just as in the rem:1.ining classes of things beyond that class which is such through itself, other classes exist char arc such through another, so in the order of eternity beneath God, who is eternal through Himself, many things exist which arc made eternal through H im. The Timaeus says chat these are the things created by God without an inccrmediary.H The human soul will be immortal, chen, and it has been inserted in this body, like meaning in the air, by God speaking. Whoever attends co chis meaning understands the mind of God speaking. 


: VIII : 
Panaetius' objection and its rebuttal. That the soul comes from God without any intermediary. 
Panaetius will grant us perhaps char God could create something 1 
in matter without the use of matter or an instrument, bur will not 
concede that our soul is created like this unless we can provide a 
clearer proof. For he chinks that the soul of a newborn child is produced from the soul of its parents as a body from a body, be­cause children are often born resembling cheir parents both in body and in natural abiliry.50 However Panaetius' view seems of little moment, because children differ from their parents often in body and most often in soul. Those who do succeed to their par• enrs' behavior patterns acquire chem by habituation rather th:m by birth. If those who do nor acquire these patterns by upbringing, nonetheless copy them, chey do nor copy chem because soul is born from soul, but because the soul from an early age pampers ics own body, and in chis body certain similar inducements occur ow­ing to the parents' complexion. However, as they grow older, they use their own judgments, and they change their behavior patterns for better or for worse. So we should reject Panaetius' view. 
However, since he asked us for a clearer proof of the face chat 2 the soul comes from God, our proof is as follows. Whenever 


something comes its way, the rational soul examines not only what 
it is and what ir is like, bur whar is irs origin. And it never stops 
until it has found its cause. Nor docs ir stop at any cause bur it so 
keeps on hunting for the cause of the cause char it docs not rest 
until it has reached d1e supreme cause. Everything comes ro rest in 
its proper end. Its proper end is its proper cause. For there it is 
made perfect. Bur all things strive cowards natural perfection as 
cheir end. If they appear to be seeking a common end, yet they do 
nor adopt it except to the extent that it suits chem, is adapted to 
chem, and becomes more properly theirs. A common end becomes 
theirs when it is received in a cause that is proximate to them, 
sufficient, and ordered from on high. Air docs not seek Venus or 
Jupiter even though it originates (ulrirnatclyJ from rhem. It seeks the (nearer] concave vault of fire where its own rational principle exists and its own home. Similarly, ocher things do not seek just any cause of themselves. Otherwise they would either never stop until chey were transformed into God, who is rhe first principle of everything; or, if they were never transformed into God, they would keep moving pointlessly and at random. So they do not seek just any cause, but the proximate one. For it suffices for each thing to preserve its own species uncorrupted and whole. Bur the proximate cause is preserved by its own cause, which must be sufficient and ordered from on high. Bur the highest cause would change the species of something for removed from itself into a higher nature, and there the thing would cease to be what it was and perish. This is nor what things seek for: rather they seek co remain secure in their own state. To the extent that they remain in this stare, they acquire a likeness too to rhc first cause. All chis is to what end? Thar you might understand char only 3 when each rhing reaches its proximate cause does it come to a complete resr and not seek further. And so the mind, which comes to rest in no one thing unless ir is the first, has no cause ofirs own except the first. A proof of chis is that man's mind is turned to­


wards God without an intermediary. For things are converted co­wards their cause in chc same way as they proceed from it. Those chat proceed through an intermediary are converted through an in• cermediary, and chose that proceed without an intermediary are converted too without an intermediary. The soul reflects on God without an intermediary when it sees God, not in any creature or in any image of the sense or phantasy, but above all created things as absolute and unadorned. It secs Him like this when ic proves chat God is so infinite chat He surpasses everything we can think ofby an infinite distance and where no created thing is interposed between God and the soul. But how can the soul's gaze be fixed on God without an intermediary unless the power of gazing also comes from God without an intermediary? 
Should it appear, however, that the soul does need certain in• 4 termediarics for this in chat it ascends to God through the struc­ture of the world and the orders of the angels, then be aware chat che soul does not use these intermediaries in order co sec God in them or through chem like seeing che sun in water or through glass. It uses chem rather like steps in order that, having once fallen below its own level, it might return to its own citadel via these seeps. Having returned there, it secs God without an inter· mediary. Through the world's order, moreover, and having set aside the cukivation of chc body, it is induced co return co its rea• son, and then through the searching out or inspiration of chc an• gels, and having sec aside ics customary discourse of reason, it is admonished to return again co the light formerly bestowed on it from on high. Having returned thither, it sees God through what is now the very light ofGod like someone who uses the sun's ray to look at the sun itself and no longer at the colors of bodies. Zo• roaster puts it like chis: "You must ascend to che light itself and to the rays of the father, whence soul, enveloped in the ample light of the mind, Rowed into you."s1 



